500
Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, 'Shop Around'
Writers: Berry Gordy, Robinson
Producer: Gordy
Released: Dec. '60, Tamla
16 weeks; No. 2

Robinson thought Barrett Strong should record "Shop Around," but Gordy persuaded Smokey that he was the right man for the song. After it came out, Gordy heard it on the radio and found it way too slow. He woke Robinson at 3 a.m. and called him back to the studio to re-cut it — faster and with Robinson's vocal more prominent. That one worked.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Smokey Robinson and the Miracles

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Smokey Robinson


499
Weezer, 'Buddy Holly'
Writer: Rivers Cuomo
Producer: Ric Ocasek
Released: Aug. '94, DGC
21 weeks; No. 18

In the early 1990s, Cuomo had an awkward girlfriend who was routinely picked on. His efforts to stick up for her inspired Weezer's breakthrough, a track whose bubble-grunge hooks and lines such as "I look just like Buddy Holly/And you're Mary Tyler Moore" helped the band reach a nation of pop-minded suburban punks. It also earned Weezer autographed photos from the real Mary Tyler Moore.

Appears on: Weezer (Geffen)


498
The Rolling Stones, 'Miss You'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producers: The Glimmer Twins
Released: May '78, Rolling Stones
20 weeks; No. 1

The Stones were in Toronto, rehearsing for their classic gigs at the El Mocambo Club, when Jagger, jamming with R&B legend Billy Preston, came up with "Miss You." With a disco groove and a touch of the blues via a harmonica player they found in a Paris subway, it became the band's first Number One hit in five years. "It's not really about a girl," Jagger said. "The feeling of longing is what the song is."

Appears on: Some Girls (Virgin)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Number 16, Mick Jagger

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Number Ten, Keith Richards

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Number Four, The Rolling Stones

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Number 269, The Rolling Stones' Some Girls


497
Bruce Springsteen, 'The Rising'
Writer: Springsteen
Producer: Brendan O'Brien
Released: July '02, Columbia
11 weeks; No. 52

Springsteen wrote the track about 9/11, taking the viewpoint of a firefighter entering one of the Twin Towers ("Can't see nothin' in front of me …") before unleashing the gospel-tinged chorus. It was the title track from an album intended to help his fans cope with the tragedy. "The fundamental thing I hear from fans is,'Man, you got me through' — whatever it is," he told Rolling Stone in 2002.

Appears on: The Rising (Columbia)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bruce Springsteen 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bruce Springsteen


496
Jackson Browne, 'Running on Empty'
Writer: Browne
Producer: Browne
Released: Jan. '77, Asylum
17 weeks; No. 11

The Running on Empty album was Browne's grand experiment: a set of all-new songs recorded onstage, in hotel rooms and on the tour bus. The title track was actually written while Browne was driving to the studio each day to make The Pretender. "I was always driving around with no gas in the car," he said. "I just never bothered to fill up the tank because — how far was it anyway? Just a few blocks."

Appears on: Running on Empty (Elektra)


495
The Rolling Stones, 'Brown Sugar'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: April '71, Rolling Stones
12 weeks; No. 1

The Stones take on slavery, sadomasochism, interracial sex — and make it catchy as hell. At Muscle Shoals studios, Jagger scrawled three verses on a pad, and Richards supplied an impossibly raunchy riff. Add some exultant punctuations and you have a Stones concert staple.

Appears on: Sticky Fingers (Virgin)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mick Jagger

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Keith Richards

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Rolling Stones

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Rolling Stones' Sticky Fingers


494
R. Kelly, 'Ignition (Remix)'
Writer: Kelly
Producer: Kelly
Released: Oct. '02, Jive
42 weeks; No. 2

R. Kelly's automotive metaphors for booty-knockin' in "Ignition" are subtler than they might've been; the lyrics were toned down at the request of a Chicago radio station. On Chocolate Factory, the original version of the song segued immediately into the hit remix.

Appears on: Chocolate Factory (Jive)


493
MGMT, 'Time to Pretend'
Writers: Ben Goldwasser, Andrew VanWyngarden
Producer: Dave Fridmann
Released: Jan '08, Columbia
Did Not Chart

The rhythm was inspired by the wriggling of a praying mantis that VanWyngarden and Goldwasser kept in college. VanWyngarden wrote about rock-star fantasies ("I'll move to Paris, shoot some heroin"), though it's unclear how facetious the words are. "Some think we're druggies. Others see the tongue-in-cheek element," he said. "That's what I hope for as a lyricist: confusion!"

Appears on: Oracular Spectacular (Columbia)


492
Gloria Gaynor, 'I Will Survive'
Writers: Dino Fekaris, Freddie Perren
Producers: Fekaris, Perren
Released: Dec. '78, Polydor
27 weeks; No. 1

In 1979, Gaynor's career was falling apart. Donna Summer had replaced her as the leading disco diva, and the 32-year-old Gaynor had recently suffered the death of her mother and had undergone spinal surgery. So when she belted out "I Will Survive," she brought extra attitude. The track was originally a B side, but after enterprising DJs started to play it at discos, it turned into a smash.

Appears on: I Will Survive: The Anthology (Polygram)


491
Joan Jett and the Blackhearts, 'I Love Rock 'N Roll'
Writers: Jake Hooker, Alan Merrill
Producers: Ritchie Cordell, Kenny Laguna
Released: Jan. '82, Boardwalk
20 weeks; No. 1

Attempting to jump-start a solo career after her stint in the Runaways, Jett had her demo tape to "I Love Rock 'N Roll" rejected by 23 record labels. Tiny Boardwalk Records finally bit, but the label sold her the radio rights to the track for $2,500. Today, the song is worth nearly $20 million.

Appears on: I Love Rock 'N Roll (Blackheart)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Joan Jett


490
Coldplay, 'Clocks'
Writers: Coldplay
Producers: Ken Nelson, Mark Phythian
Released: Aug. '02, Capitol
22 weeks; No. 29

Coldplay were scrambling to finish their second album and wanted to save "Clocks," with a churning piano riff inspired by the band Muse, for a later album. Luckily, a friend intervened. "He said,'You're going on [in the lyrics] about urgency, and you're talking about keeping this song back,' " said Chris Martin. " 'That doesn't make sense.' "

Appears on: A Rush of Blood to the Head (Capitol)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Coldplay's A Rush of Blood to the Head


489
The Drifters, 'Under the Boardwalk'
Writers: Arthur Resnick, Kenny Young
Producer: Bert Berns
Released: June '64, Atlantic
33 weeks; No. 4

A staple of beach-town jukeboxes every summer since its release, "Under the Boardwalk" evokes the carefree sounds of the shore. But its recording was no day at the beach. Johnny Moore was drafted to sing lead because the track's original singer, Rudy Lewis, died of a heroin overdose in his hotel room the night before the session.

Appears on: The Very Best of the Drifters (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Drifters


488
The Cure, 'Just Like Heaven'
Writers: Robert Smith, Simon Gallup, Porl Thompson, Lol Tolhurst, Boris Williams
Producers: David Allen, Smith
Released: May '87, Elektra
19 weeks; No. 40

"I've never been a big fan of irony," Smith said, which might be why this reverie of love, cut at a vineyard in the South of France, is his favorite Cure song. The band's girlfriends influenced the music. "The girls would sit on the sofa in the back of the control room and give the songs marks out of 10," he said. "So there was a really big female input."

Appears on: Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me (Elektra)


487
Alice Cooper, 'I'm Eighteen'
Writers: Michael Bruce, Glen Buxton, Cooper, Dennis Dunway, Neal Smith
Producers: Bob Erzin, Jack Richardson
Released: Feb. '71, Warner Bros.
13 weeks; No. 21

Before "I'm Eighteen," Cooper was just another hairy rock oddball. But this proto-punk smash defined the age when, in Cooper's words, you're "old enough to be drafted but not old enough to vote." A few years later, Johnny Rotten sang this at his audition for the Sex Pistols; by then, Cooper was a guest on The Muppet Show.

Appears on: Love It to Death (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Alice Cooper's Love It to Death


486
David Bowie, 'Young Americans'
Writer: Bowie
Producer: Tony Visconti
Released: March '75, RCA
11 weeks; No. 28

In 1975, Bowie traded his glammed-out Ziggy Stardust persona for an exploration of what he called "plastic soul." Yet this R&B homage is one of his warmest, wildest tales, recorded in Philadelphia with a then-unknown Luther Vandross on backing vocals and David Sanborn wailing on sax. "It's about a newlywed couple who don't know if they really like each other," Bowie said.

Appears on: Young Americans (Virgin)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: David Bowie

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: David Bowie


485
LaBelle, 'Lady Marmalade'
Writers: Bob Crewe, Kenny Nolan
Producer: Allen Toussaint
Released: Jan. '75, Epic
18 weeks; No. 1

This hit about a Big Easy streetwalker remains in rotation 35 years after it hit Number One. The group was from Philadelphia, but the nasty groove was classic New Orleans, with producer Toussaint and his house band, legendary R&B stalwarts the Meters, funking up the beat. Thanks to the ladies of LaBelle, every disco fan now knows at least one line of French: "Voulez-vous coucher avec moi?"

Appears on: Nightbirds (Epic)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Patti LaBelle 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: LaBelle's Nightbirds


484
Justin Timberlake, 'Cry Me a River'
Writers: Timbaland, Scott Storch, Timberlake
Producer: Timbaland
Released: Nov. '02, Jive
20 weeks; No. 3

This breakup aria marked the formation of the Timberlake–Timbaland team, a match made in pop heaven. The stunning video — in which Justin stalks an actress dressed to look like his ex Britney Spears — made clear the inspiration for "River." "It's a good-ass video," Timberlake told Rolling Stone. "I didn't want anyone to come off smelling like roses."

Appears on: Justified (Jive)


483
Jefferson Airplane, 'White Rabbit'
Writer: Grace Slick
Producer: Rick Jarrard
Released: Sept. '67, RCA
10 weeks; No. 8

"White Rabbit" was a trippy rock & roll bolero written by Airplane vocalist Slick. "Our parents read us stories like Peter Pan, Alice in Wonderland and The Wizard of Oz," Slick said. "They all have a place where children get drugs, and are able to fly or see an Emerald City or experience extraordinary animals and people… And our parents are suddenly saying, 'Why are you taking drugs?' Well, hello!"

Appears on: Surrealistic Pillow (RCA)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Jefferson Airplane's Surrealistic Pillow


482
Kelly Clarkson, 'Since U Been Gone'
Writers: Dr. Luke, Max Martin
Producers: Dr. Luke, Martin
Released: Nov. '04, RCA
46 weeks; No. 2

Pop gurus Max Martin and Lukasz "Dr. Luke" Gottwald wrote this indignant track with Pink in mind, but Clarkson's A&R rep snatched it up for the first-ever American Idol. The result was a career-making hit that gave teen pop a feisty new template. "I went to see Foo Fighters when I was off in Texas," Clarkson said, "and the first thing Dave Grohl said to me was, 'I love that song!' "

Appears on: Breakaway (RCA)


481
Rick James, 'Super Freak'
Writers: James, Alonzo Miller
Producer: James
Released: Aug. '81, Gordy
24 weeks; No. 16

James wasn't exactly modest about his ambitions. As he declared in 1981, "I wanna make Paul McCartney white-boy money!" He got it with the self-described "punk funk" of "Super Freak," from his breakthrough album, Street Songs. James enlisted the Temptations for background vocals. The song got a second life when MC Hammer jacked it for the 1990 megasmash "U Can't Touch This."

Appears on: Street Songs (Motown)


480
Beastie Boys, 'Sabotage'
Writers: Beastie Boys
Producers: Beastie Boys, Mario Caldato Jr.
Released: May '94, Grand Royal
Did Not Chart

Adam "MCA" Yauch came up with the killer fuzz-bass riff at Manhattan's Tin Pan Alley studio, but it wasn't until a year later that the song was finished in L.A. With two weeks to go before Ill Communication was completed, Adam "Ad-Rock" Horovitz got all hot and bothered about paparazzi on the mike and came out of the song's breakdown with a scream for the ages.

Appears on: Ill Communication (Capitol)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Beastie Boys


479
Foreigner, 'I Want to Know What Love Is'
Writer: Mick Jones
Producers: Jones, Alex Sadkin
Released: Nov. '84, Atlantic
21 weeks; No. 1

This gospel-rock hymn featured Dreamgirls star Jennifer Holliday, one of the Thompson Twins and, most notably, the New Jersey Mass Choir. Said Jones, "I'll always remember them getting in a circle before we did it and everyone saying the Lord's Prayer." That probably didn't happen for "Hot Blooded" — but this soaring ballad became Foreigner's biggest hit.

Appears on: Agent Provocateur (Atlantic)


478
The Strokes, 'Last Nite'
Writer: Julian Casablancas
Producer: Gordon Raphael
Released: Aug. '01, RCA
Did Not Chart

Youthful angst on the Lower East Side: Lou Reed vocals and cool confusion, driven by the surging, garage-band sound that would go on to define early-2000s rock. The Strokes supposedly nicked the opening riff from Tom Petty's "American Girl." "I saw an interview with them where they admitted it," Petty told Rolling Stone. "I was like, 'OK, good for you.' It doesn't bother me."

Appears on: Is This It (RCA)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Strokes's Is This It


477
The Smiths, 'How Soon Is Now?'
Writers: Johnny Marr, Morrissey
Producer: John Porter
Released: Feb. '85, Sire
Did Not Chart

Morrissey cribbed lyrics from George Eliot, but guitarist Marr cited another reference: Derek and the Dominos. "I wanted an intro that was almost as potent as 'Layla,'" he said. "When [it] plays in a club or a pub, everyone knows what it is."

Appears on: Meat Is Murder (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Morrissey 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Smiths's Meat Is Murder


476
Aretha Franklin, 'Do Right Woman — Do Right Man'
Writers: Chips Moman, Dan Penn
Producer: Jerry Wexler
Released: March '67, Atlantic
11 weeks; No. 9

Franklin disappeared after a 1967 session in Muscle Shoals, Alabama, leaving this simmering ballad unfinished. A few weeks later, she resurfaced in New York. The resulting vocal, said producer Wexler, was "perfection."

Appears on: I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Aretha Franklin 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Aretha Franklin 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Aretha Franklin's I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You


475
The Supremes, 'Where Did Our Love Go'
Writers: Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier, Eddie Holland
Producers: Brian Holland, Dozier
Released: June '64, Motown
14 weeks; No. 1

After eight flop singles, the trio were known as the "No-Hit Supremes." The Marvelettes — Motown's top girl group at that point — passed on this song, and the Supremes didn't like their own recording. Until it hit Number One, that is. That foot-stomping beat is actually two boards banged together.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Diana Ross and the Supremes


474
Van Morrison, 'Into the Mystic'
Writer: Morrison
Producer: Morrison
Released: March '70, Warner Bros.
Non-Single

"Into the Mystic" is one of Morrison's warmest ballads, an Otis Redding-style reverie with acoustic guitar and horns. The lyrics are truly mysterious: "People say, 'What does this mean?' " said Morrison. "A lot of times I have no idea what I mean. That's what I like about rock & roll — the concept. Like Little Richard — what does he mean? You can't take him apart; that's rock & roll to me."

Appears on: Moondance (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Van Morrison 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Van Morrison 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Van Morrison's Moondance


473
Guns N' Roses, 'Welcome to the Jungle'
Writers: Guns n' Roses
Producer: Mike Clink
Released: Aug. '87, Geffen
17 weeks; No. 7

Slash's Seventies-metal crunch and Axl's hell-bound shriek brought brutal realism to the L.A. glam-metal scene. "They're real-life stories, these fuckin' songs," bassist Duff McKagan said. "Jungle" beckoned listeners into the Gunners' sordid Hollywood milieu, but Rose's inspiration came from getting lost during his first trip to New York.

Appears on: Appetite for Destruction (Geffen)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Guns n' Roses 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Guns n' Roses's Appetite for Destruction 

•100 Best Albums of the Eighties: Guns n' Roses's Appetite for Destruction


472
Del Shannon, 'Runaway'
Writers: Shannon, Max Crook
Producers: Harry Balk, Irving Micahnik
Released: March '61, Big Top
17 weeks; No. 1

As a kid, Shannon got his first guitar for $5. His truck-driver dad wasn't too happy about it. "'You get that goddamn guitar outta here' — that's the exact words my father used," Shannon recalled. "However, my ma said, 'It's OK, son. You can sing for me.'" He sang this hit with raw emotion; co-writer Crook played the solo on an early electronic keyboard called the Musitron.

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Rhino)


471
Cheap Trick, 'Surrender'
Writer: Rick Nielsen
Producer: Tom Werman
Released: May '78, Epic
8 weeks; No. 62

Cheap Trick provided the ultimate Seventies teen anthem in "Surrender," with a verse about a kid who catches his parents making out and gets stoned to his Kiss records. Guitarist- songwriter Nielsen's secret? "I [had] to go back and put myself in the head of a 14-year-old."

Appears on: Heaven Tonight (Epic)


470
The Four Tops, 'Standing in the Shadows of Love'
Writers: Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier, Eddie Holland
Producers: Brian Holland, Dozier
Released: Dec. '66, Motown
10 weeks; No. 6

Like so many other Motown hits, "Standing" features the popping bass of James Jamerson. He was such a monster player, his fellow musicians called him "Igor"; Marvin Gaye called him a genius.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Four Tops


469
The Beatles, 'Rain'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: June ’66, Capitol
7 weeks; No. 23

The B side of “Paperback Writer” was Lennon‘s response to people moaning about the wet British weather. It featured one of the earliest uses of backward tape, which Lennon said was the result of being stoned and spooling up the tape wrong. It also included virtuoso drumming from Ringo Starr. “I feel as though that was someone else playing,” Starr said. “I was possessed!”

Appears on: Past Masters (Capitol/Apple)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles


468
The Staple Singers, 'Respect Yourself'
Writers: Luther Ingram, Mack Rice
Producer: Al Bell
Released: Oct. '71, Stax
14 weeks; No. 12

Stax singer Ingram, frustrated with the state of the world, told house songwriter Rice that "black folk need to learn to respect themselves." Rice liked the comment so much that he built a funk groove around it, then gave the song to the Staples. "This is the song I've been waiting [for]," said producer Bell, who laid it down with the famous Muscle Shoals Rhythm Section.

Appears on: Bealtitude: Respect Yourself (Stax)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mavis Staples


467
Jay-Z Featuring UGK, 'Big Pimpin''
Writers: Jay-Z, Bun B, Pimp C, Timbaland, Kyambo Joshua
Producer: Timbaland
Released: Dec. '99, Roc-A-Fella
20 weeks; No. 18

For this thumping ode to conspicuous consumption, the king of New York rap hooked up with Houston rap dons UGK over a beat that sounds like it was cut in Cairo. Timbaland allegedly based the melody on a 1957 song by Egyptian Abdel Halim Hafez.

Appears on: Vol. 3: Life and Times of S. Carter (Roc-A-Fella)


466
Missy Elliott, 'Get Ur Freak On'
Writers: Elliott, Timbaland
Producer: Timbaland
Released: March '01, Gold Mind/Elektra
25 weeks; No. 7

Elliott was convinced that Miss E needed one more track. So Timbaland cooked up a stuttering, tabla-laden beat based on bhangra, an Indian dance genre he heard while traveling, and plucked out the signature six-note riff on a tumbi, a one-stringed Punjabi guitar.

Appears on: Miss E … So Addictive (Atlantic/ATG)


465
Muddy Waters, 'Rollin' Stone'
Writer: McKinley Morganfield
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess
Released: 1948, Chess
predates chart

For Chess Records' first single, Waters turned Mississippi bluesman Robert Petway's "Catfish Blues" into a spare track he named "Rollin' Stone." "We wouldn't do it exactly like those older fellows," Waters said. "We put the beat with it, put a little drive to it." The Rolling Stones took their name from it, as did, in part, this magazine.

Appears on: The Anthology: 1947-1972 (Chess/MCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Muddy Waters 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Muddy Waters


464
Prince and the Revolution, 'Kiss'
Writers: Prince and the Revolution
Producers: Prince and the Revolution
Released: Feb. '86, Paisley Park
18 weeks; No. 1

The Paisley Park band Mazarati asked Prince for a song, so he dashed off a bluesy acoustic demo for them. Mazarati added a funk groove, and Prince was smart enough to take the song back.

Appears on: Parade (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Prince

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Prince


463
Sam and Dave, 'Soul Man'
Writers: Isaac Hayes, David Porter
Producers: Hayes, Porter
Released: Sept. '67, Stax
15 weeks; No. 2

For the follow-up to "Hold On, I'm Comin'," writer-producers Hayes and Porter decided to tinker with their formula: Porter asked singer Sam Moore to give him "the Bobby Bland squall," guitarist Steve Cropper came up with the licks that set up the familiar blast of the Memphis Horns, and — voilà! — another soul classic was born. "We had no idea how good we were," Hayes said of the partnership.

Appears on: Soul Men (Rhino)


462
Nirvana, 'All Apologies'
Writer: Kurt Cobain
Producer: Steve Albini
Released: Sept. '93, Geffen
22 weeks; No. 45

Written in the L.A. apartment Cobain shared with Courtney Love, this haunting meditation on remorse was originally produced by punk malcontent Albini, but then R.E.M. producer Scott Litt was brought in to smooth it out — the original had a long stream of feedback on it. Cobain's shredded vocals maintain the punk edge in the hushed MTV Unplugged in New York rendition.

Appears on: In Utero (Geffen)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Kurt Cobain 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Kurt Cobain 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Nirvana 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Nirvana's In Utero


461
Ramones, 'Sheena Is a Punk Rocker'
Writers: Ramones
Producers: Tony Bongiovi, T. Erdelyi
Released: May '77, Sire
13 weeks; No. 81

This was cut twice: first as a single that was rushed to radio and became one of the Ramones' few modest hits, then in a slightly souped-up version for the band's album Rocket to Russia. "I combined Sheena, Queen of the Jungle, with the primalness of punk rock," said Joey Ramone. "It was funny, because all the girls in New York seemed to change their names to Sheena after that."

Appears on: Rocket to Russia (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Johnny Ramone

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Ramones

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Ramones's Rocket to Russia


460
George Harrison, 'My Sweet Lord'
Writer: Harrison
Producers: Harrison, Phil Spector
Released: Nov. '70, Apple
14 weeks; No. 1

The first hit for an ex-Beatle, it features Harrison's teardrop slide licks and a melody virtually identical to the Chiffons' "He's So Fine." After a lawsuit, Harrison had to pay $587,000 to his former manager Allen Klein, who then owned the rights to "He's So Fine." "It made me so paranoid about writing," Harrison said. "I thought, 'I don't even want to touch the guitar, in case I'm touching somebody's note.'"

Appears on: All Things Must Pass (Capitol)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: George Harrison 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: George Harrison's All Things Must Pass


459
Guns N' Roses, 'Paradise City'
Writers: Guns n' Roses
Producer: Mike Clink
Released: Aug. '87, Geffen
17 weeks; No. 5

For nearly seven minutes, Axl Rose expounds on the joys of green grass, pretty girls and toxic chemicals. The song was written in the back of a van as the band drove home to L.A. after a gig in San Francisco, with all the members tossing in lines. In a typically tasteful G n' R move, the video has footage of the band's 1988 gig at Castle Donington in the U.K. — where two fans were crushed to death.

Appears on: Appetite for Destruction (Geffen)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Guns n' Roses 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Guns n' Roses's Appetite for Destruction 

•100 Best Albums of the Eighties: Guns n' Roses's Appetite for Destruction


458
Sam Cooke, 'Cupid'
Writer: Cooke
Producers: Cooke, Hugo and Luigi
Released: July '61, RCA
17 weeks; No. 12

Cooke's producers had asked him to write a song for a girl they had seen on a Perry Como TV show — but once they heard her sing, they kept "Cupid" for Cooke to do himself. It was Cooke's idea to drop in the sound of an arrow being fired "straight to my lover's heart."

Appears on: Greatest Hits (RCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Sam Cooke 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Sam Cooke


457
Chubby Checker, 'The Twist'
Writer: Hank Ballard
Producer: Karl Mann
Released: Aug. '60, Parkway
39 weeks; No. 1

"The Twist" began as a B side for Ballard and the Midnighters in 1958. But in 1960, former chicken plucker Checker covered it at Dick Clark's suggestion. "Going crazy is what I was looking for — where the music is so good you lose control," Checker said. " 'The Twist' did that."

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Prime Cuts)


456
The Beatles, 'Penny Lane'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Feb. '67, Capitol
10 weeks; No. 1

After Lennon composed "Strawberry Fields Forever," McCartney wrote his own snappy memoir. Penny Lane was a Liverpool bus stop where Lennon and McCartney often met. "John came over and helped me with the third verse, as was often the case," McCartney said. "We were writing recently faded memories from eight or 10 years before."

Appears on: Magical Mystery Tour (Capitol/Apple)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles


455
The Velvet Underground, 'Heroin'
Writer: Lou Reed
Producers: Andy Warhol, Tom Wilson
Released: March '67, Verve
Non-Single

This seven-minute, two-chord track spiked out its territory with lyrics about shooting up until you felt like Jesus' son. "It wasn't pro or con," Reed said. "It was about taking heroin from the point of view of someone taking it. I'm still not sure what was such a big deal. So there's a song called 'Heroin.' So what?" Drummer Moe Tucker disagreed: "I consider it our greatest triumph."

Appears on: The Velvet Underground and Nico (Polydor)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Velvet Underground 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Velvet Underground's The Velvet Underground and Nico 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Lou Reed


454
The Shangri-Las, 'Leader of the Pack'
Writers: George "Shadow" Morton, Jeff Barry, Ellie Greenwich
Producers: Morton, Barry, Greenwich
Released: Oct. '64, Red Bird
12 weeks; No. 1

Morton found the inspiration for this song at a diner in Hicksville, New York. "Bikers, hot rodders, gum-smacking ladies," he said, "not careful at all about their language." He brought a bike into the studio for the motorcycle sounds.

Appears on: Myrmidons of Melodrama: Definitive Collection (RPM)


453
Toots and the Maytals, 'Pressure Drop'
Writer: Toots Hibbert
Producer: Leslie Kong
Released: Feb. '73, Mango
Did Not Chart

Toots and the Maytals were already reggae stars — they coined the word on 1968's "Do the Reggay" — before "Pressure Drop." They were rumored to be Chris Blackwell's choice over Bob Marley and the Wailers when he wanted a group for his Island label.

Appears on: The Harder They Come (Hip-O)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Harder They Come


452
Nirvana, 'Come As You Are'
Writers: Kurt Cobain, Nirvana
Producers: Butch Vig, Nirvana
Released: Sept. '91, Geffen
18 weeks; No. 32

"It's just about people and what they're expected to act like," Cobain said. "The lines in the song are really contradictory. They're kind of a rebuttal to each other." The song is driven by a simple riff that Vig goosed with a flanged, subaquatic guitar effect. Cobain apparently lifted it from a 1985 song by U.K. art-metal band Killing Joke, whom Dave Grohl paid back 12 years later by drumming on their 2003 album.

Appears on: Nevermind (Geffen)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Kurt Cobain 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Kurt Cobain 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Nirvana 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Nirvana's Nevermind


451
Sonny and Cher, 'I Got You Babe'
Writer: Sonny Bono
Producer: Bono
Released: July '65, Atco
14 weeks; No. 1

Late one night, while Sonny and Cher were living in their manager's house, Bono woke up Cher and asked her to listen to "I Got You Babe" and to sing the lyrics, which he had written on a piece of shirt cardboard. She thought it was OK but really wanted a song that modulated. So he changed the key at the bridge and woke Cher up again hours later to hear it; she was delighted.

Appears on: The Beat Goes On: The Best of Sonny and Cher (Atlantic)

450
Bob Marley and the Wailers, 'I Shot the Sheriff'
Writer: Marley
Producer: Chris Blackwell
Released: Oct. '73, Island
did not chart

Marley, Peter Tosh and Bunny Wailer saved some of their prettiest falsetto harmonies for one of the group's toughest songs. Inspired by the Impressions' "Keep On Pushin'," Marley originally had the song's outlaw hero say, "I shot the police," but imagined the song would be more government-friendly if he changed it to the revenge killing of a single sheriff.

Appears on: Burnin' (Island)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Marley 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Marley 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Wailers' Burnin'


449
The Dell-Vikings, 'Come Go With Me'
Writer: Clarence E. Quick
Producer: Joe Averbach
Released: Feb. '57, Dot
31 weeks; No. 5

Five airmen who came together at the NCO Service Club in Pittsburgh, the Dell-Vikings underwent several lineup changes because members kept getting sent to Germany. Eventually they became pop's first successful multiracial group on the strength of "Come Go With Me." The song was written by the group's bass singer and recorded one night in a Pittsburgh hotel room.

Appears on: Golden Classics (Collectables)


448
50 Cent, 'In Da Club'
Writers: 50 Cent, Dr. Dre, Mike Elizondo
Producers: Dr. Dre, Elizondo
Released: Dec. '02, Interscope/Aftermath/Shady
30 weeks; No. 1

50 Cent's rhyme skills caught the notice of Dr. Dre and Eminem, who helped assemble this party track. "50 walked into the studio and picked up a pen," Dre said. "We were done in an hour. We just made some shit we wanted to hear."

Appears on: Get Rich or Die Tryin' (Interscope/Aftermath/Shady)


447
John Cougar Mellencamp, 'Pink Houses'
Writer: Mellencamp
Producers: Little Bastard, Don Gehman
Released: Oct. '83, Riva
16 weeks; No. 8

Recorded in a farmhouse in Brownstown, Indiana, "Pink Houses" was inspired by an old man "sitting on the porch of his pink shack," Mellencamp told Rolling Stone. "He waved, and I waved back. That's how the song started."

Appears on: Uh-Huh (Mercury)

RELATED:

•100 Best Albums of the Eighties: John Cougar Mellencamp's Uh-huh


446
Salt 'n Pepa, 'Push It'
Writer: Hurby "Luv Bug" Azor
Producer: Azor
Released: Nov. '87, Next Plateau
25 weeks; No. 19

In 1985, Azor recruited fellow Sears employees Cheryl James and Sandy Denton for a music-school project. With the addition of Dee Dee "Spinderella" Roper, Salt 'N Pepa became the first female MCs to crack the pop Top 20 when this track was remixed by San Francisco DJ Cameron Paul. "Push It" was nominated for a Grammy, but Salt 'N Pepa boycotted the show when the rap category wasn't televised.

Appears on: Hot, Cool and Vicious (London)


445
The Stooges, 'I Wanna Be Your Dog'
Writers: Dave Alexander, Ron Asheton, Scott Asheton, Iggy Pop
Producer: John Cale
Released: August '69, Elektra
Did Not Chart

These groundbreaking Detroit punks tapped into the brutal side of the blues for this primitive classic. They also offer a one-note piano tribute to the Kinks' "You Really Got Me." Over the ultimate bone-crunching three-chord guitar riff, Iggy Pop screams about the agony of teenage hormones the way only Iggy Pop can.

Appears on: The Stooges (Elektra)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Stooges 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Stooges's The Stooges 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Iggy Pop


444
Elvis Presley, 'Love Me Tender'
Writers: Presley, Vera Watson
Producer: Steve Sholes
Released: Oct. '56, RCA
23 weeks; No. 1

"Love Me Tender" was the theme song from the first Elvis movie and represented a new sound for the King. He sang in his softest voice, accompanied only by his own acoustic guitar. The melody came from the Civil War-era ballad "Aura Lee."

Appears on: Elvis: 30 #1 Hits (RCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley


443
The Rolling Stones, 'Beast of Burden'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producers: The Glimmer Twins
Released: June '78, Rolling Stones
13 weeks; No. 8

By 1978, the Stones were in turmoil, after trouble with drugs, women and the law. On "Beast of Burden," they faced up to their struggles with world-weary defiance. On other takes, Jagger tried the song in falsetto, but his straight-ahead version went to the Top 10.

Appears on: Some Girls (Virgin)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Rolling Stones' Some Girls

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mick Jagger

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Keith Richards

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Rolling Stones


442
Love, 'Alone Again Or'
Writer: Bryan MacLean
Producers: Arthur Lee, Bruce Botnick
Released: Jan. '68, Elektra
3 weeks; No. 99

The psychedelic cowboys of Love became famous for their dark, poetic L.A. folk rock. But "Alone Again Or," the opening track on the band's masterwork, Forever Changes, was written and partly sung by guitarist MacLean — who later left the band to join a Christian ministry — as a tribute to his mother's flamenco dancing. The final take is a decidedly trippy swirl of strings, horns and Spanish-style acoustic guitars.

Appears on: Forever Changes (Rhino)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Love's Forever Changes


441
Wilson Pickett, 'Mustang Sally'
Writer: Sir Mack Rice
Producer: Jerry Wexler
Released: Nov. '66, Atlantic
9 weeks; No. 23

"Mustang Sally" nearly ended up on the studio floor — literally. After Pickett finished his final take at Fame Studios in Muscle Shoals, Alabama, the tape flew off the reel and broke into pieces. But engineer Tom Dowd calmly cleared the room and told everyone to come back in half an hour. Dowd pieced the tape back together, saving one of the funkiest soul anthems of the Sixties.

Appears on: The Very Best of Wilson Pickett (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Wilson Pickett


440
Led Zeppelin, 'Ramble On'
Writers: Jimmy Page, Robert Plant
Producer: Page
Released: Oct. '69, Atlantic
Non-Single

Groupies and The Lord of the Rings inspired "Ramble On," recorded in New York on Led Zeppelin's first U.S. tour. Over Page's acoustic guitars, Plant wails, "In the darkest depths of Mordor/I met a girl so fair." Middle Earth influenced more than the music: "After reading Tolkien," Page said, "I knew I had to move to the country." According to legend, John Bonham is banging on a plastic garbage can.

Appears on: Led Zeppelin II (Atlantic)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Led Zeppelin 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Led Zeppelin's Led Zeppelin II 

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimmy Page 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Robert Plant


439
Gladys Knight and the Pips, 'Midnight Train to Georgia'
Writer: Jim Weatherly
Producer: Tony Camillo
Released: Sept. '73, Buddah
19 weeks; No. 1

Originally titled "Midnight Plane to Houston," the ode to long-distance romance from Mississippi songwriter Weatherly (who also wrote Knight's "Neither One of Us") became the biggest hit ever for Gladys Knight and the Pips. Cissy Houston had an R&B hit with it first, before Knight rode it to the top of the pop charts.

Appears on: Essential Collection (Hip-O)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time:  Gladys Knight


438
Fats Domino, 'Ain't It a Shame'
Writers: Dave Bartholomew, Domino
Producer: Bartholomew
Released: July '55, Imperial
13 weeks; No. 10

In the summer of 1955, "Ain't It a Shame" became Domino's first pop smash, after a string of R&B hits. Pat Boone's whitebread cover (retitled "Ain't That a Shame" — though Boone allegedly wanted it to be "Isn't That a Shame") reached Number One, but as Jerry Wexler put it, "Fats Domino is still the thing. Who cares about what's his name with the white buck shoes?"

Appears on: The Fats Domino Jukebox: 20 Greatest Hits (Capitol)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Fats Domino


437
The Clash, '(White Man) In Hammersmith Palais'
Writers: Mick Jones, Joe Strummer
Producers: The Clash
Released: July '79, Epic
Did Not Chart

"We can't play reggae," Strummer said in 1977. But the Clash invented a skank of their own, toasting the solidarity they saw between punks and Rastas. The anti-racist fusion of "Hammersmith Palais" also skewered sellouts in both scenes. "I was trying to talk about revolution and how we weren't ever gonna have one," he said.

Appears on: The Clash (Epic)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Clash 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Clash's The Clash


436
Solomon Burke, 'Everybody Needs Somebody to Love'
Writers: Burke, Bert Berns, Jerry Wexler
Producer: Berns
Released: July '64, Atlantic
8 weeks; No. 58

Philadelphia-born Burke started preaching at the age of seven and often recorded his vocals from behind a pulpit. He attacks this song in the style of a fire-and-brimstone Southern preacher, calling out for a witness and testifying to the power of love. In the congregation: the Rolling Stones, who covered it in 1965.

Appears on: The Very Best of Solomon Burke (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Solomon Burke


435
U2, 'New Year's Day'
Writers: Bono, the Edge, Adam Clayton, Larry Mullen Jr.
Producer: Steve Lillywhite
Released: April '83, Island
12 weeks; No. 53

"New Year's Day" lifted U2 out of the rock underground for good. As he often did, Bono made up his lyrics on the spot. "We improvise, and the things that came out, I let them come out," he said. "I must have been thinking about Lech Walesa being interned. Then, when we'd recorded the song, they announced that martial law would be lifted in Poland on New Year's Day. Incredible."

Appears on: War (Island)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: U2's War 

•100 Best Albums of the Eighties: U2's War

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bono

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: U2


434
Deep Purple, 'Smoke on the Water'
Writers: Ritchie Blackmore, Ian Gillian, Roger Glover, Jon Lord, Ian Paice
Producers: Deep Purple
Released: May '73, Warner Bros.
16 weeks; No. 4

Keyboardist Lord claimed that the working title for this song was "Durh Durh Durh" — a transliteration of the riff that some beginner guitarist is probably trying out for the first time right now. The lyrics tell the story of a fan shooting a flare gun during a 1971 Frank Zappa show at the Casino in Montreux, Switzerland, setting the venue ablaze.

Appears on: Machine Head (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Richie Blackmore


433
Rolling Stones, 'Tumbling Dice'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: April '72, Rolling Stones
10 weeks; No. 7

Originally titled "Good Time Women" (an early take is on the recent Exile on Main Street reissue), "Tumbling Dice" had numerous faster incarnations before it was recorded at Richards' villa, Nellcôte. "I remember writing the riff upstairs in the very elegant front room," said Richards, "and we took it downstairs the same evening, and we cut it." Since Bill Wyman wasn't around, Mick Taylor played bass.

Appears on: Exile on Main Street (Virgin)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Rolling Stones' Exile on Main Street

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Rolling Stones

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mick Jagger

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Keith Richards


432
Green Day, 'American Idiot'
Writers: Green Day
Producers: Rob Cavallo, Green Day
Released: Oct. '04, Reprise
20 weeks; No. 61

No song captured the rancid zeitgeist of the Bush era like this Clash-style rave-up, which bashed the USA's "redneck agenda." The starting point for Green Day's punk opera, later a Broadway musical, "Idiot" signaled the band's evolution into righteously angry political rockers. "We did everything we could to piss people off," said Billie Joe Armstrong, who often performed the song in a George W. Bush mask.

Appears on: American Idiot (Reprise)


431
The Smiths, 'William, It Was Really Nothing'
Writers: Johnny Marr, Morrissey
Producer: John Porter
Released: Aug. '84, Sire
Did Not Chart

Asked in 1984 who was the last person to see him naked, Morrissey replied, "Almost certainly the doctor who brought me into this cruel world." But like many of the Smiths' early singles, "William" is a tale of traumatic teen sex, in this case a tragic love triangle in a humdrum town. OutKast's André 3000, a huge Smiths fan, once named "William" as his absolute favorite.

Appears on: Louder Than Bombs (Sire)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Smith's Louder Than Bombs 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Morrissey


430
Elvis Presley, 'Blue Suede Shoes'
Writer: Carl Perkins
Producer: Steve Sholes
Released: March '56, RCA
12 weeks; No. 20

The day after Presley made his television debut, on Jimmy and Tommy Dorsey's Stage Show, he went into a studio in New York, kicking off the session with "Blue Suede Shoes"; Perkins' original was still climbing the charts. Despite 13 takes, Presley and Sholes felt they hadn't matched it. Maybe they were right: Perkins' single got to Number Two, but Presley's peaked at Number 20.

Appears on: 2nd to None (BMG Heritage)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley


429
Billy Joel, 'Piano Man'
Writer: Joel
Producer: Michael Stewart
Released: Nov. '73, Columbia
14 weeks; No. 25

Joel grew up playing in rock bands, but a California hiatus as a lounge pianist (under the name Bill Martin) saw him pecking out standards for lost souls. "It was all right," he said. "I got free drinks and union scale, which was the first steady money I'd made in a long time."

Appears on: Piano Man (Columbia)


428
The Isley Brothers, 'It's Your Thing'
Writers: Rudolph Isley, Ronald lsley, O'Kelly Isley
Producers: R. Isley, R. Isley, O. Isley
Released: Feb. '69, T-Neck
14 weeks; No. 2

In 1969, the Isleys fled Motown and revived their own T-Neck Records, where they unleashed the free-will funk of "It's Your Thing." Their biggest hit, it earned a lawsuit from Berry Gordy, who claimed he owned the song.

Appears on: The Ultimate Isley Brothers (Legacy)


427
Dr. Dre, 'Nuthin' But a 'G' Thang'
Writer: Snoop Dogg
Producer: Dr. Dre
Released: Jan. '93, Death Row
27 weeks; No. 2

Dre's debut solo single sampled the bass line from Leon Haywood's '75 hit "I Want'a Do Something Freaky to You." The mastermind on his working methods: "I sit around by myself in the studio at home, push buttons and see what happens."

Appears on: The Chronic (Death Row)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Dr. Dre 

500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Dr. Dre's The Chronic


426
Crosby, Stills and Nash, 'Suite: Judy Blue Eyes'
Writer: Stephen Stills
Producers: David Crosby, Stills, Graham Nash
Released: June '69, Atlantic
12 weeks; No. 21

Written by Stills for ex-girlfriend Judy Collins, this epic harmony showcase kicked off CSN' s debut album. Stills played most of the instruments, but as Nash told Rolling Stone, "The three-part vocal blend was fucking fantastic."

Appears on: Crosby, Stills and Nash (Atlantic)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Crosby, Stills and Nash's Crosby, Stills and Nash 

•100 Greatest Guitarists: Stephen Stills


425
N.W.A, 'Fuck tha Police'
Writers: Ice Cube, MC Ren
Producers: Dr. Dre, Yella
Released: Jan. '89, Priority
Non-Single

With one song, N.W.A brought the battle between rappers and cops to a new level. On August 1st, 1989, the FBI sent a bulletin to Priority Records, the group's label, denouncing this song. According to the feds, "Fuck tha Police" "encourages violence against, and disrespect for, the law-enforcement officer." The publicity established N.W.A as hip-hop's bad boys.

Appears on: Straight Outta Compton (Priority)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: N.W.A 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: N.W.A's Straight Outta Compton


424
The Notorious B.I.G., 'Juicy'
Writer: The Notorious B.I.G.
Producers: Sean "Puffy" Combs, Poke
Released: Aug '94, Bad Boy
20 weeks; No. 27

Biggie's debut single chronicled the rapper's rise from "a common thief to up close and personal with Robin Leach." He rhymes about his childhood poverty growing up in the Clinton Hill section of Brooklyn (although he claimed to be from Bed-Stuy) — despite protests from his mom. "I told him, 'No landlord dissed us!'" said Voletta Wallace. "He said, 'Mom, I was just writing a rags-to-riches kinda story.'"

Appears on: Ready to Die (Bad Boy)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Notorious B.I.G.'s Ready to Die


423
Don Henley, 'The Boys of Summer'
Writers: Henley, Mike Campbell
Producers: Henley, Campbell, Danny Kortchmar, Greg Ladanyi
Released: Nov. '84, Geffen
22 weeks; No. 5

Henley gave California rock a stylish Eighties makeover with this poignant lament for his generation, featuring the famous line "Out on the road today/I saw a Deadhead sticker on a Cadillac." When the Ataris did their hit punk-rock cover version in 2003, they changed it to a Black Flag sticker — but the sentiment was the same.

Appears on: Building the Perfect Beast (Geffen)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Don Henley 

•100 Best Album of the Eighties: Don Henley's Building the Perfect Beast


422
The Four Tops, 'Can't Help Myself'
Writers: Eddie Holland, Lamont Dozier, Brian Holland
Producers: Holland, Dozier, Holland
Released: June '65, Motown
14 weeks; No. 1

"My real style of singing is just a natural thing," said Four Tops frontman Levi Stubbs. "What I mean by that is I don't consider myself as being a heck of a singer, man. I'm more of a stylist, if you will." His soul stylings sent this Tops classic to Number One — after the four original members had already been performing together for 10 years.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Four Tops


421
The Coasters, 'Young Blood'
Writers: Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller, Doc Pomus
Producers: Leiber, Stoller
Released: May '57, Atco
11 weeks; No. 1

The Coasters were named after the West Coast, home turf of the four singers. After evolving from the doo-wop group the Robins, the Coasters had a couple of small R&B hits, "Down in Mexico" and "Turtle Dovin'." But after almost a year away from the studio, the group relocated to New York and cut its first blockbuster.

Appears on: The Very Best of the Coasters (Rhino)


420
Little Richard, 'The Girl Can't Help It'
Writer: Bobby Troup
Producer: Robert "Bumps" Blackwell
Released: Jan. '57, Specialty
8 weeks; No. 49

Richard screamed the theme from one of the first great rock movies, starring Jayne Mansfield. "She was a wonderful person," Richard said. "Her breasts were 50 inches, and she didn't wear a brassiere. They didn't hang down."

Appears on: The Georgia Peach (Specialty)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Little Richard 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Little Richard


419
Bobbie Gentry, 'Ode to Billie Joe'
Writer: Gentry
Producers: Kelly Gordon, Bobby Paris
Released: July '67, Capitol
14 weeks; No. 1

Once and for all: Exactly what did Billie Joe throw off the Tallahatchee Bridge? Gentry never revealed the secret of this spooky country blues. "The real message," she said, "revolves around the way the nonchalant family talks about the suicide."

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Curb)


418
Donna Summer, 'I Feel Love'
Writers: Summer, Giorgio Moroder, Pete Bellotte
Producers: Moroder, Bellotte
Released: May '77, Casablanca
23 weeks; No. 6

Summer would dismiss "I Feel Love" as a "popcorn track," but its impact on dance music is incalculable. When Brian Eno first listened to this, he told David Bowie, "I've heard the sound of the future." Thanks to Moroder's throbbing Moog synthesizers and Summer's epic-orgasm vocals, "I Feel Love" claimed tomorrow in the name of disco.

Appears on: The Donna Summer Anthology (Casablanca)


417
Pixies, 'Monkey Gone to Heaven'
Writer: Black Francis
Producer: Gil Norton
Released: March '89, Elektra
Did Not Chart

Numerology, sludge in the ocean, a hole in the sky — what's it all supposed to mean? Said Francis (a.k.a. Frank Black), "The phrase 'monkey gone to heaven' just sounds neat." Norton cleaned up the band's sound, adding the eerie strings, but the Pixies didn't bother to try for pop appeal. Said Francis, "It wasn't like we thought we'd get played on the radio."

Appears on: Doolittle (4 AD/Elektra)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Pixies' Doolittle


416
Aerosmith, 'Sweet Emotion'
Writers: Steven Tyler, Tom Hamilton
Producer: Jack Douglas
Released: April '75, Columbia
8 weeks; No. 36

As the sessions for Toys in the Attic, Aerosmith's third studio album, reached the 11th hour at the Record Plant in New York, producer Douglas called out for ideas. Bassist Hamilton resurrected a riff that had been germinating for several years, and it was outfitted with bass marimba and Joe Perry's voice-box recitation of the song title. A few months later, Aerosmith had their first Top 40 single.

Appears on: Toys in the Attic (Sony)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Aerosmith 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Aerosmith's Toys in the Attic 

•100 Greatest Guitarists: Joe Perry 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Steven Tyler


415
Nirvana, 'In Bloom'
Writer: Kurt Cobain
Producer: Butch Vig
Released: Sept. '91, DGC
Non-Single

"I don't like rednecks, I don't like macho men," Cobain once said. This track about a guy who "loves to shoot his gun" would become one of Nirvana's biggest live anthems. It started out as more of a hardcore rant. "It sounded like a Bad Brains song," said Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic. Then, "One day Kurt called me and started singing. It was the 'In Bloom' of Nevermind, more of a pop thing."

Appears on: Nevermind (Geffen)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Nirvana 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Nirvana's Nevermind


414
Carpenters, 'We've Only Just Begun'
Writers: Paul Williams, Roger Nichols
Producer: Jack Daugherty
Released: Sept. '70, A&M
17 weeks; No. 2

"Begun" began life as a TV jingle for a California bank that caught Richard Carpenter's ear. He called Williams to see if there was an actual song attached to the short bit he'd heard. "I assumed that it would never, ever get cut again," Williams said. He wrote several hits for the Carpenters, but this soft-rock ode remains the watershed. Richard later called it "our best single."

Appears on: Singles 1969-1981 (Interscope)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Karen Carpenter


413
Bob Dylan, 'Visions of Johanna'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Bob Johnston
Released: May '66, Columbia
Non-Single

"It's easier to be disconnected than connected," Dylan confessed in late 1965. "I've got a huge hallelujah for all the people who're connected, that's great, but I can't do that." He never sounded lonelier than in this seven-minute ballad, originally titled "Seems Like a Freeze-Out." Dylan cut it in a single take on Valentine's Day 1966, with Al Kooper on Hammond B3 organ.

Appears on: Blonde on Blonde (Columbia)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Bob Dylan's Blonde on Blonde 


412
Rihanna Featuring Jay-Z, 'Umbrella'
Writers: The-Dream, Kuk Harrell, Jay-Z, Christopher "Tricky" Stewart
Producers: Harrell, Stewart
Released: March' 07, Def Jam
27 weeks; No. 1

The songwriters initially offered the track to Britney Spears, whose career was spiraling out of control. "We thought, 'Let's save our friend,' " the-Dream says. But Spears' management brushed them off. "I'm so thankful for it," Rihanna said. "I prayed for this song."

Appears on: Good Girl Gone Bad (Def Jam)


411
Eddie Cochran, 'C'mon Everybody'
Writers: Cochran, Jerry Capehart
Producer: Capehart
Released: Oct. '58, Liberty
12 weeks; No. 35

Cochran was paid $82.50 for the three-hour session that produced this classic rockabilly track. The follow-up to his smash "Summertime Blues," "C'mon" is a good-natured bad-boy tune powered by heavy strumming on his Martin guitar. Although he died at age 21, in a 1960 car crash that also seriously injured rockabilly pioneer Gene Vincent, Cochran became a huge influence in England.

Appears on: Something' Else (Razor and Tie)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Guitarists: Eddie Cochran


410
Sly and the Family Stone, 'Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin)'
Writer: Sly Stone
Producer: Stone
Released: Jan. '70, Epic
13 weeks; No. 1

The double-sided smash "Thank You"/"Everybody Is a Star" was Sly's sole new release in 1970. "Thank You" rode on the finger-popping bass of Larry Graham, who played like that in a duo with his organist mother. "I started to thump the strings with my thumb," he said, "to make up for not having a drummer."

Appears on: Anthology (Epic)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Sly Stone

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Sly and the Family Stone


409
The Shirelles, 'Tonight's the Night'
Writers: Luther Dixon, Shirley Owens
Producer: Dixon
Released: Sept. '60, Scepter
12 weeks; No. 39

The Shirelles, who originally called themselves the Pequellos, formed while at their Passaic, New Jersey, high school. Lead singer Owens was only 19 when she co-wrote this hit about romantic surrender, full of Latin-style syncopation and soulful yearning.

Appears on: 25 All-Time Greatest Hits (Varèse Fontana)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Shirelles


408
Metallica, 'Enter Sandman'
Writers: James Hetfield, Lars Ulrich, Kirk Hammett
Producers: Bob Rock, Hetfield, Ulrich
Released: July '91, Elektra
20 weeks; No. 16

Thanks to producer Rock, the coiled, brooding "Enter Sandman" was the first Metallica tune that sounded perfect for the radio. As drummer Ulrich pointed out in 1991, "The whole intro, the verse, the bridge, the chorus — it's the same riff."

Appears on: Metallica (Elektra)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Metallica's Metallica


407
Lynyrd Skynyrd, 'Sweet Home Alabama'
Writers: Ed King, Gary Rossington, Ronnie Van Zant
Producer: Al Kooper
Released: April '74, MCA
17 weeks; No. 8

Van Zant sang this pissed-off answer to Neil Young's "Southern Man," and even Young loved it. "I'd rather play 'Sweet Home Alabama' than 'Southern Man' anytime," Young said. The admiration was mutual; Van Zant wore a Young T-shirt on the cover of Skynyrd's final album, Street Survivors, and according to legend, he is buried in the shirt.

Appears on: Second Helping (MCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Lynyrd Skynyrd


406
Big Star, 'Thirteen'
Writers: Alex Chilton, Chris Bell
Producer: John Fry
Released: April '72, Ardent
Non-Single

Chilton wrote this acoustic ballad about two kids in love with rock & roll, featuring the deathless couplet "Won't you tell your dad, 'Get off my back'/Tell him what we said about 'Paint It Black.'" It's simple musically; as Chilton said, "I was still learning to play and stuff." It never came out as a single or got any radio play, but "Thirteen" is one of rock's most beautiful celebrations of adolescence.

Appears on: #1 Record/Radio City (Fantasy)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Big Star's #1 Record


405
Blue Öyster Cult, '(Don't Fear) the Reaper'
Writer: Donald Roeser
Producers: Murray Krugman, Sandy Pearlman, David Lucas
Released: July '76, Columbia
14 weeks; No. 12

This Long Island band's death trip was picked by Rolling Stone critics as the best rock single of 1976. With its ghostly guitars and cowbell, "Reaper" has added chills to horror flicks from Halloween to The Stand. Bonus points for the crackpot theology about how "40,000 men and women every day" join Romeo and Juliet in eternity.

Appears on: Agents of Fortune (Columbia)


404
The Shangri-Las, 'Remember (Walkin' in the Sand)'
Writer: George "Shadow" Morton
Producer: Morton
Released: Aug. '64, Red Bird
11 weeks; No. 5

The Shangri-Las, two sets of sisters from Queens, were in high school when producer Morton hired them to record "Remember" — a tune he claimed to have written in 20 minutes on the way to the studio. One story has it that a 15-year-old Billy Joel played piano on the session. Morton went on to produce the New York Dolls.

Appears on: The Best of the Shangri-Las (Mercury)


403
Elvis Presley, 'Can't Help Falling in Love'
Writers: George Weiss, Hugo Peretti, Luigi Creatore
Producer: Joseph Lilley
Released: Oct. '61, RCA
14 weeks; No. 1

This adaptation of Giovanni Martini's 18th-century song "Plaisir d'Amour" was given to Elvis for his movie Blue Hawaii — hence the Hawaiian steel guitar. But this was no vacation for Presley: It took him 29 takes to nail his exquisitely gentle vocals. The song became the closing number for most of his Seventies concerts.

Appears on: Elvis 30 #1 Hits (RCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley


402
The Five Stairsteps, 'O-o-h Child'
Writer: Stan Vincent
Producer: Vincent
Released: April '70, Buddha
16 weeks; No. 8

"O-o-h Child" gave the Five Stairsteps — four brothers and a sister from Chicago — a pop-soul classic that rivaled the hits of another sibling gang, the Jackson 5. The children of police detective Clarence Burke, the Five Stairsteps, who played their own instruments as well as sang, ranged in age from 13 to 17 when Curtis Mayfield signed them to his Windy C label.

Appears on: Soul Hits of the '70s: Didn't It Blow Your Mind! Vol. 2 (Rhino)


401
The Lovin' Spoonful, 'Summer in the City'
Writers: John Sebastian, Steve Boone, Mark Sebastian
Producer: Erik Jacobsen
Released: June '66, Kama Sutra
11 weeks; No. 1

"Summer in the City" was a stylistic turn for the Lovin' Spoonful — tougher and less daydreamy. "We felt the only way we could stick out would be to sound completely different from one single to another," said John Sebastian. With a barrage of car horns on the bridge, the record evoked its subject with urban grit and Gershwin-esque grandeur.

Appears on: The Lovin' Spoonful Greatest Hits (Buddha)

400
The Four Tops, 'Baby I Need Your Loving'
Writers: Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier, Eddie Holland
Producers: Holland, Dozier, Holland
Released: July '64, Motown
12 weeks; No. 11

The Four Tops were playing a Detroit nightclub when they got a call from Brian Holland saying he had a song ready for them. After their show ended, they arrived at Hitsville at 2 a.m. to record "Baby I Need Your Loving," which would become their first single for Motown.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Four Tops


399
The Temptations, 'Just My Imagination'
Writers: Norman Whitfield, Barrett Strong
Producer: Whitfield
Released: Jan. '71, Gordy
15 weeks; No. 1

Eddie Kendricks, who'd sung lead on the Temptations' first hit, "The Way You Do the Things You Do" in 1964, took his last lead as a Tempt. By the time the song hit Number One, Kendricks had left the group for a solo career. But he gave this one his all: Tempt Otis Williams said he left the studio at 6 a.m. the night they cut it, and Kendricks was still there, working out his part.

Appears on: Anthology (Motown)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Temptations 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Temptations' Anthology


398
The Police, 'Roxanne'
Writer: Sting
Producers: The Police
Released: Jan '79, A&M
13 weeks; No. 32

"That song has been the turnaround for us," Stewart Copeland told Rolling Stone. Sting came up with the idea for the song while wandering around the red-light district of Paris after a canceled show, wondering what it would be like to be in love with a prostitute. The title came from a poster for the play Cyrano de Bergerac — featuring a heroine named Roxanne — in the band's hotel lobby in Paris.

Appears on: Outlandos d'Amour (Interscope)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Police 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Police's Outlandos d'Amour


397
Elton John, 'Tiny Dancer'
Writers: John, Bernie Taupin
Producer: Gus Dudgeon
Released: Nov. '71, Uni
7 weeks; No. 41

Lyricist Taupin wrote this 1971 song about his first wife, Maxine Feibelman, who really was a seamstress for John's band and obviously did marry a music man. John's skyrocketing melody got a little help from Paul Buckmaster's strings and from Rick Wakeman, soon to join prog-rockers Yes, who played organ. "Tiny Dancer" was revived in the 2000 film Almost Famous.

Appears on: Madman Across the Water (Island)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elton John 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elton John 


396
Eric B. and Rakim, 'Know You Got Soul'
Writers: Eric B. and Rakim
Producers: Eric B. and Rakim
Released: July '87, 4th and Broadway
Did Not Chart

Rakim was the microphone fiend who was dripping steam. Eric B. was the DJ with the James Brown samples. They were New York legends before ever releasing a song ("Eric B. was driving a Rolls-Royce before he ever put out a record," Chris Rock once told Rolling Stone. "My man was gangsta"), but this cut, named for a 1971 song by Brown sideman Bobby Byrd, made the whole world take notice.

Appears on: Paid in Full (Island)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Eric B. and Rakim's Paid in Full


395
Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, 'Ohio'
Writer: Neil Young
Producers: Crosby, Stills, Nash, Young
Released: June '70, Atlantic
9 weeks; No. 14

On May 4th, 1970, the National Guard killed four protesters at Kent State University in Ohio. Young wrote a fiery indictment of the shootings, and CSNY cut their version of the song just 11 days after the tragedy, then rush-released it, knocking their own "Teach Your Children" off the charts. "David Crosby cried when we finished this take," said Young.

Appears on: Decade (Reprise)


394
The Beatles, 'Ticket to Ride'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: April '65, Capitol
11 weeks; No. 1

Lennon claimed that this composition of his was the first heavy-metal song. For his part, McCartney played lead guitar. "We almost invented the idea of a new bit of a song on the fade-out," he said of "Ticket." "It was quite radical at the time."

Appears on: Help! (Capitol/Apple)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beatles' Help!


393
The Allman Brothers Band, 'Whipping Post'
Writer: Gregg Allman
Producer: Tom Dowd
Released: Nov. '69, Capricorn
Non-single

This anthem was written on an ironing board in a darkened Florida bedroom by Allman. Punctuated by Duane Allman's knifelike guitar incisions, the song is best appreciated in the 23-minute incarnation on At Fillmore East.

Appears on: At Fillmore East (Mercury)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Allman Brothers Band 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Allman Brothers Band's At Fillmore East 

•100 Greatest Guitarists: Duane Allman 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Gregg Allman


392
The Verve, 'Bitter Sweet Symphony'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Richard Ashcroft
Producers: The Verve, Christopher Marc Potter, Youth
Released: Sept. '97, Virgin
20 weeks; No. 12

Since it used a sample from an orchestral version of the Rolling Stones' "The Last Time," this song was credited to Jagger–Richards. But Allen Klein, who owned the "Last Time" rights, broke an agreement and demanded 100 percent of the royalties. Ashcroft called it the best song the Stones had written in 20 years.

Appears on: Urban Hymns (Virgin)


391
Aaron Neville, 'Tell It Like It Is'
Writers: George Davis, Lee Diamond
Producer: Davis
Released: Nov. '66, Par Lo
14 weeks; No. 2

"I heard 'Tell It Like It Is' and I said, 'Bro, this is the shit right here,'" said Art Neville. Aaron was working as a longshoreman when he cut this sublime ballad. He originally felt something so sweet wouldn't catch on in an era of gritty R&B. "A lot of people come up to me and say, 'That song got me and my wife together,'" he recalled. "And others say, 'It broke me and my wife up.'"

Appears on: Tell It Like It Is: Golden Classics (Collectables)


390
Elton John, 'Goodbye Yellow Brick Road'
Writers: John, Bernie Taupin
Producer: Gus Dudgeon
Released: Sept. '73, MCA
17 weeks; No. 2

Inspired by the Rolling Stones' Goats Head Soup, John and lyricist Taupin went to Kingston, Jamaica, to record John's sixth album. "The studio was surrounded by barbed wire," said Taupin, "and there were guys with machine guns." Too scared to leave their hotel, the duo wrote 21 songs in three days, including "Goodbye Yellow Brick Road."

Appears on: Goodbye Yellow Brick Road (Island)

RELATED:

500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Elton John's Goodbye Yellow Brick Road

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elton John 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elton John 


389
R.E.M., 'Radio Free Europe'
Writers: R.E.M.
Producers: Mitch Easter, Don Dixon
Released: July '83, I.R.S.
5 weeks; No. 78

"We hated it," said Peter Buck of the sound on the first version of "Europe," on indie label Hib-Tone. "It was mastered by a deaf man, apparently." R.E.M. rerecorded it for Murmur, with a richer melody and tighter rhythm — "like Motown," Buck recalled. Michael Stipe mumbled his lyrics — a vague riff on U.S. cultural imperialism — because he hadn't finished writing them when it was time to record.

Appears on: Murmur (A&M)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: R.E.M.'s Murmur 

•100 Best Albums of the Eighties: R.E.M.'s Murmur


388
U2, 'Pride (In the Name of Love)'
Writers: Bono, the Edge, Adam Clayton, Larry Mullen Jr.
Producers: Brian Eno, Daniel Lanois
Released: Oct. '84, Island
15 weeks; No. 33

The chords came from a 1983 soundcheck in Hawaii; the lyrics about Martin Luther King Jr. were inspired by an exhibit at Chicago's Peace Museum. With backing vocals by Pretenders singer Chrissie Hynde (credited as Mrs. Christine Kerr; she was married to Jim Kerr of Simple Minds at the time), the result was the band's first Top 40 hit.

Appears on: The Unforgettable Fire (Island)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: U2 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bono


387
Ray Charles, 'Hit the Road Jack'
Writer: Percy Mayfield
Producer: Sid Feller
Released: Sept. '61, ABC-Paramount
11 weeks; No. 1

Charles asked Mayfield, a one-time R&B hitmaker whose performing career was curtailed by a car accident in 1952, if he had any songs for Charles to record. Mayfield offered up "Hit the Road Jack." The snarling female vocal was provided by Margie Hendricks of the Raelettes. Hendricks' affair with Charles produced a son in 1959; Charles fired her from the Raelettes in 1964.

Appears on: Ultimate Hits Collection (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Ray Charles 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Ray Charles


386
Yeah Yeah Yeahs, 'Maps'
Writers: Yeah Yeah Yeahs
Producer: David Andrew Sitek
Released: Feb. '04, Interscope
13 weeks; No. 87

"Maps" is both a soul ballad and an art-punk classic, with torrents of jagged guitar noise and thundering drums backing up Karen O's lovesick wail. The YYY's breakthrough hit was inspired by a case of real-life rock & roll romance: The Divine Miss O (real name Karen Orzolek) wrote the song about being on tour and missing her boyfriend, Angus Andrew, singer for fellow New York band Liars.

Appears on: Fever to Tell (Interscope)


385
Radiohead, 'Fake Plastic Trees'
Writers: Radiohead
Producer: John Leckie
Released: March '95, Capitol
4 weeks; No. 65

Radiohead frontman Thom Yorke would describe "Fake Plastic Trees" as the song on which he found his lyrical voice. He cut the vocal, accompanying himself on acoustic guitar, in one take, then the band filled in its parts around him. Yorke said the song began as "a very nice melody which I had no idea what to do with, then you wake up and find your head singing some words to it."

Appears on: The Bends (Capitol)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Thom Yorke 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Radiohead 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Radiohead's The Bends 


384
Pink Floyd, 'Another Brick in the Wall Part 2'
Writer: Roger Waters
Producers: Bob Ezrin, Waters, David Gilmour
Released: Nov. '79, Columbia
25 weeks; No. 1

Waters' attack on teachers who practice "dark sarcasm in the classroom" was inspired by his own schoolmasters. "The school I was at — they were really like that," Waters said. "[All] they had to offer was their own bitterness and cynicism." There are three versions of "Another Brick" on The Wall, but "Part 2" was the hit.

Appears on: The Wall (Capitol)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Pink Floyd's The Wall 

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: David Gilmour


383
Chuck Berry, 'Brown Eyed Handsome Man'
Writer: Berry
Producer: Leonard Chess, Phil Chess
Released: Sept. '56, Chess
Did Not Chart

Berry was inspired to write this song while he was touring through heavily black and Latino areas of California. As Berry put it, "I didn't see too many blue eyes." He did see a good-looking Chicano nabbed for loitering until "some woman came up shouting for the policeman to let him go." Over a manic guitar lick, the song spins a riotous tale about a dark-eyed loverman.

Appears on: The Anthology (Chess)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Chuck Berry 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Chuck Berry 

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Chuck Berry


382
Sam Cooke, 'Wonderful World'
Writers: Cooke, Herb Alpert, Lou Adler
Producers: Cooke, Adler
Released: May '60, RCA
15 weeks; No. 12

Cooke was rooming with Adler, who had already finished this song when Cooke came up with the academic conceit that made it work. Cut while Cooke was still signed to Keen, it sat around until he'd moved to RCA — then sold a million. Before it came out, Cooke liked to sing it for women he met, telling them he'd made it up on the spot just for them.

Appears on: Portrait of a Legend 1951-1964 (ABKCO)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Sam Cooke 

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Sam Cooke 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Sam Cooke's Portrait of a Legend 1951-1964


381
Television, 'Marquee Moon'
Writer: Tom Verlaine
Producer: Andy Johns
Released: Feb. '77, Elektra
Did Not Chart

"Marquee Moon" is Television's guitar epic; Verlaine and Richard Lloyd stretch out for 10 minutes of urban paranoia. "I would play until something happened," Verlaine said. "That comes from jazz, or even the Doors, or the Five Live Yardbirds album — that kinda rave-up dynamics."

Appears on: Marquee Moon (Elektra)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Television's Marquee Moon 

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Tom Verlaine


380
The Who, 'I Can't Explain'
Writer: Pete Townshend
Producer: Shel Talmy
Released: March '65, Decca
2 weeks; No. 93

For their debut single, the Who recorded Townshend's alleged answer to the Kinks' blazing "You Really Got Me." The Who even hired that song's producer, Talmy, who recruited additional players for the recording, among them Jimmy Page, who contributed rhythm guitar.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (MCA)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Who 

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Pete Townshend 

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Roger Daltrey


379
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, 'The Wind Cries Mary'
Writer: Hendrix
Producer: Chas Chandler
Released: May '67, Reprise
8 weeks; No. 65

A dish-smashing argument with his girlfriend left Hendrix alone to scrawl the words to "The Wind Cries Mary" in January 1967. A few days later, the guitarist taught the uncharacteristically tender ballad — built around a gentle riff inspired by soul man Curtis Mayfield — to the Experience. The trio knocked out the track in 20 minutes.

Appears on: Are You Experienced? (MCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix 

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Jimi Hendrix Experience's Are You Experienced?


378
Bo Diddley, 'I'm a Man'
Writer: Diddley
Producer: Leonard Chess
Released: June '55, Checker
Did Not Chart

The B side of Diddley's first single was built around a four-note guitar stomp that was a trademark of mid-Fifties Chicago blues. Songwriter Willie Dixon, who supervised the 1955 session, said it was Diddley's sense of rhythm that set him apart from everyone else at Chess: "The drums are speaking, and he'll tell you what the drums are saying."

Appears on: His Best: The Chess 50th Anniversary Collection (Chess)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bo Diddley 

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Bo Diddley


377
Depeche Mode, 'Personal Jesus'
Writer: Martin Gore
Producers: Depeche Mode, Flood
Released: Nov. '89, Sire
20 weeks; No. 28

Depeche Mode's breakthrough single was based on a surprising source: Priscilla Presley's book Elvis and Me. "It's about how Elvis was her man and her mentor and how often that happens in love relationships," Gore said. "How everybody's heart is like a god in some way."

Appears on: Violator (Sire)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Depeche Mode's Violator


376
Cream, 'White Room'
Writers: Pete Brown, Jack Bruce
Producer: Felix Pappalardi
Released: Aug. '68, Atco
11 weeks; No. 6

Powered by Eric Clapton's wah-wah work, the song's unnerving psychedelic imagery came from Brown, emerging from a period of drug and alcohol excess. "It was in my white-painted room that I had the horrible drug experience that made me want to stop everything," he said.

Appears on: Wheels of Fire (Polygram)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Cream 

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Cream's Wheels of Fire


375
Bee Gees, 'How Deep Is Your Love'
Writers: Bee Gees
Producers: Bee Gees, Karl Richardson, Albhy Galuten
Released: Sept. '77, RSO
33 weeks; No. 1 

The first single from Saturday Night Fever wasn’t a disco track but this slow jam. It went to Number One in December 1977, and the Bee Gees then controlled the top spot for 15 of the next 20 weeks. The song was originally intended for Yvonne Elliman, who had her own Number One with “If I Can’t Have You.”

Appears on: Saturday Night Fever (Polygram)


374
The Righteous Brothers, 'Unchained Melody'
Writers: Alex North, Hy Zaret
Producer: Phil Spector
Released: July '65, Philles
13 weeks; No. 4

This song first hit the charts in 1955, when three different versions of it landed in the Top 10. The Righteous Brothers picked up the torch in 1965, making it the B side to their single "Hung on You." When DJs began playing "Unchained Melody" instead, Spector decided the duo should put out only covers of pre-rock pop songs as its singles; their version of Sinatra’s "Ebb Tide" also hit big.

Appears on: Anthology 1962-1974 (Rhino)


373
Bob Dylan, 'Highway 61 Revisited'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Bob Johnston
Released: Aug. '65, Columbia
Did not chart

"Highway 61 begins about where I came from," Dylan writes in Chronicles. "Duluth, to be exact." The road runs through the heart of America — and so does the song. It’s Dylan at his wildest, both musically and lyrically, topping the band's roadhouse stomp with his surreal cosmic jokes. The police-siren whistle was courtesy of session man Al Kooper.

Appears on: Highway 61 Revisited (Columbia)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time: Bob Dylan's Highway 61 Revisited

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan


372
The Box Tops, 'The Letter'
Writer: Wayne Carson Thompson
Producer: Dan Penn
Released: July '67, Mala
16 weeks; No. 1

On "The Letter," Alex Chilton moans like a gruff soul man, though he was just 16. He credited the performance to his producer, Memphis legend Penn. "[He] coached me pretty heavily on singing anything we ever did," Chilton said. “In a lot of cases, it sounds more like him singing than it sounds like me.” Chilton went on to front Big Star but participated in Box Tops reunion tours until his death in 2010.

Appears on: The Letter (Sundazed)


371
The Clash, 'Complete Control'
Writers: Mick Jones, Joe Strummer
Producer: Lee "Scratch" Perry
Released: July '79, Epic
Non-single 

The Clash were hardcore reggae fans, so it was natural they would want to work with legendary dub producer Perry. But the resulting single wasn’t dub at all — it was the Clash’s toughest, noisiest punk anthem, with Mick Jones cranking the guitar to ear-bleeding levels. "Complete Control," a U.K. hit in the fall of 1977, was appended to the American version of the band's debut album.

Appears on: The Clash (Epic)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Clash's The Clash


370
The Beatles, 'All You Need is Love'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: July '67, Capitol
11 weeks; No. 1

Twenty-four days after the release of Sgt. Pepper, the Beatles represented England on the six hour TV show Our World, a satellite broadcast seen by 400 million. "All You Need Is Love" was the simple message they wanted to send to the world. "It was for love and bloody peace," Ringo Starr said. The backing choir on the single included Mick Jagger, Keith Moon and Donovan.

Appears on: Magical Mystery Tour (Capitol)


369
Roberta Flack, 'Killing Me Softly With His Song'
Writers: Norman Gimbel, Charles Fox
Producer: Joel Dorn
Released: Jan '73, Atlantic
16 weeks; No. 1

Inspired by a Don McLean gig at L.A.'s Troubadour, folk singer Lori Lieberman took her idea for the song to Gimbel and Fox. Flack later heard Lieberman’s recording on an in-flight radio station and "absolutely freaked," she said.

Appears on: Killing Me Softly (Atlantic)


368
Muddy Waters, 'Got My Mojo Working'
Writer: Preston Foster
Producers: Phil Chess, Leonard Chess, Willie Dixon
Released: 1957, Chess
Did not chart

Waters made his version of "Mojo" after hearing R&B singer Ann Coleper form it while they toured together in 1956. He retooled the rhythm and lyrics, turning it into a speedy howl about voodoo and sexual power.

Appears on: The Anthology (Chess/MCA)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Muddy Waters' The Anthology

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Muddy Waters

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Muddy Waters


367
Martha and the Vandellas, 'Nowhere to Run'
Writers: Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier, Eddie Holland
Producers: Brian Holland, Dozier
Released: Feb. '65, Gordy
11 weeks; No. 8

Martha Reeves was working as a secretary for A&R man Mickey Stevenson at Motown when Mary Wells missed a session date; Reeves stepped in for her and eventually became a star. Her wail makes "Nowhere to Run" a scary tale of obsessive love; the heavy percussion was enhanced with snow chains.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Martha and the Vandellas


366
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, 'Little Wing'
Writer: Hendrix
Producer: Chas Chandler
Released: Feb. '68, Reprise
Non-single

Blissed out from his appearance at Monterey Pop, Hendrix brought a delicate touch to this ballad at a 1967 London session. In a mere 145 seconds, he conjured a gossamer reverie. Hendrix played one of his most lyrical solos through a Leslie speaker cabinet (creating an oscillating sound) and later added glockenspiel to complete the mood.

Appears on: Axis: Bold as Love (Experience Hendrix/MCA)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Jimi Hendrix Experience's Axis: Bold as Love

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix

•The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix


365
Eurythmics, 'Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This)'
Writers: Annie Lennox, Dave Stewart
Producer: Stewart
Released: April '83, RCA
26 weeks; No. 1

"Sweet Dreams" was a deceptively catchy single from two former lovers. "The day Dave and I ended our romance, Eurythmics began," Annie Lennox told Rolling Stone. But the tense sessions for "Sweet Dreams" nearly ended their musical partnership. "I was curled up in the fetal position," Lennox said. "He programmed this rhythm. It sounded so good. In the end I couldn't resist it."

Appears on: Sweet Dreams (RCA)


364
Creedence Clearwater Revival, 'Bad Moon Rising'
Writer: John Fogerty
Producer: Fogerty
Released: April '69, Fantasy
14 weeks; No. 2

"This song is definitely not about astrology," Fogerty once joked. "[It’s] scary, spooky stuff." With violence at home and a war abroad, there was a bad moon on the rise, and CCR effortlessly tapped into the darkening national mood. The song had one of CCR’s catchiest swamp-rock riffs, an homage to Elvis Presley’s guitarist Scotty Moore that Fogerty wrote in high school.

Appears on: Green River (Fantasy)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Creedence Clearwater Revival's Green River


363
Elvis Costello, 'Watching the Detectives'
Writer: Costello
Producer: Nick Lowe
Released: Nov. '77, Columbia
Did not chart

In the summer of 1977, Costello was still an aspiring songwriter when he took the Clash’s debut back to his London flat and "listened to it for 36 hours straight," he recalled. "And I wrote 'Watching the Detectives.'" Still, he maintained, "I was never part of any punk-rock thing. I couldn't afford to go to nightclubs at night. I had a wife and kid, and I had to go to work."

Appears on: My Aim Is True (Rhino)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time:  Elvis Costello's My Aim Is True

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Costello


362
Eric Clapton, 'Tears in Heaven'
Writers: Clapton, Will Jennings
Producer: Russ Titelman
Released: Jan. '92, Duck/Reprise
26 weeks; No. 2

On March 20th, 1991, four-year old Conor Clapton died in a fall from an apartment window in New York. His father wrote the heartrending "Tears in Heaven" and "The Circus Left Town" for his son. "They’re sweet little songs, almost like folk songs, and I feel the need to have people hear them," he told Rolling Stone. "Tears" anchored his 1992 MTV Unplugged set.

Appears on: "Rush" Soundtrack (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Eric Clapton

•The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Eric Clapton


361
Elvis Presley, 'All Shook Up'
Writers: Otis Blackwell, Presley
Producers: Steve Sholes
Released: March '57, RCA
30 weeks; No. 1

Songwriter Al Stanton walked up to Blackwell one day shaking a bottle of Pepsi and challenged him to write a song called "All Shook Up." Presley fell in love with the tune the first time he heard it and gave it the same freewheeling charm he had brought to Blackwell’s "Don’t Be Cruel," even reprising the guitar-backslapping trick he’d used on that track. It worked: The song went on to sell 2 million copies.

Appears on: Elvis 30 #1 Hits (RCA)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley


360
The Platters, 'The Great Pretender'
Writer: Buck Ram
Producer: Ram
Released: Dec. '55, Mercury
24 weeks; No. 1

Heirs to the crooning style of the Ink Spots and the Mills Brothers, the Platters became the first R&B vocal group to top the pop charts, heralding the arrival of doo-wop. Ram, who also co-wrote "Only You" and "Twilight Time," was pushing 50 when "Pretender" hit.

Appears on: The Magic Touch: An Anthology (Mercury)


359
Little Eva, 'The Loco-Motion'
Writers: Gerry Goffin, Carole King
Producer: Goffin
Released: June '62, Dimension
16 weeks; No. 1

At 17, Eva Boyd was hired to baby-sit King and Goffin’s newborn during recording sessions. One day they asked her to cut a demo for this song. "There never was a dance called the loco-motion until it was a hit," King said. "So Little Eva had to make up a dance."

Appears on: The Loco-Motion (Rhino)


358
Ben E. King, 'Spanish Harlem'
Writers: Phil Spector, Jerry Leiber
Producers: Mike Stoller, Leiber
Released: Dec. '60, Atco
16 weeks; No. 10

Just split from the Drifters, King was eager to make an auspicious solo debut and insisted on cutting this rare collaboration between Spector and Leiber. (King grew up mere blocks from Spanish Harlem.) Spector said this was Lenny Bruce’s favorite song.

Appears on: The Very Best of Ben E. King (Rhino)


357
The Isley Brothers, 'That Lady (Part 1 and 2)'
Writers: The Isley Brothers
Producers: The Isley Brothers
Released: July '73, T-Neck
20 weeks; No. 6

In 1969, the Isleys added younger brothers Ernie and Marvin, who had been put through music school by their older brothers. Ernie repaid the debt on "That Lady" with a guitar solo recalling onetime Isleys sideman Jimi Hendrix.

Appears on: The Essential Isley Brothers (Legacy)


356
Elton John, 'Candle in the Wind'
Writers: John, Bernie Taupin
Producer: Gus Dudgeon
Released: Oct. '73, MCA

John’s Marilyn Monroe tribute was a U.K. hit in 1973, but in the U.S. the single release was canceled when DJs began playing "Bennie and the Jets" instead. A live version with the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra recorded in 1986 finally reached the U.S. charts, and a 1997 rerelease with new lyrics in honor of Princess Diana became the biggest-selling single of the 20th century.

Appears on: Goodbye Yellow Brick Road (Island)

RELATED:

•The Top 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elton John

•The Top 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elton John


355
Dr. Dre and 2Pac, 'California Love'
Writers: Dr. Dre, Chris Stainton, Roger Troutman, Larry Troutman, 2Pac
Producer: Dr. Dre
Released: Feb. '96, Death Row
24 weeks; No. 6

When 2Pac left jail in October 1995, after serving eight months for a sexual-assault conviction, Dre had a hit ready for him: a slice of West Coast funk, built around a Joe Cocker sample and a vocal from Zapp frontman Roger Troutman. “I don’t want it to be about violence,” 2Pac said seven months before he was shot dead. “I want it to be about money.”

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Death Row)


354
Ritchie Valens, 'La Bamba'
Writer: William Clauson
Producer: Bob Keane
Released: Oct. '58, Del-Fi
15 weeks; No. 22

Valens' version of this traditional Mexican wedding song was originally the B side to his first hit, "Donna." "La Bamba" entered the Top 40 two weeks before the 17-yearold died in the same plane crash that killed Buddy Holly and the Big Bopper.

Appears on: The Ritchie Valens Story (Rhino)


353
Big Brother and the Holding Company, 'Piece of My Heart'
Writers: Bert Berns, Jerry Ragovoy
Producer: John Simon
Released: Aug. ’68, CBS
12 weeks; No. 12

The original was sung by Erma Franklin, Aretha’s sister. "Erma’s 'Piece of Heart' had a delicacy and a sense of mystery that was just beyond us," said guitarist Sam Andrew. But what Big Brother did have was a raw, fearless singer named Janis Joplin.

Appears on: Cheap Thrills (Columbia)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Albums of All time: Big Brother and the Holding Company's Cheap Thrills


352
Lavern Baker, 'Jim Dandy'
Writer: Lincoln Chase
Producers: Ahmet Ertegun,Jerry Wexler
Released: Dec. '56, Atlantic
19 weeks; No. 17

Baker was a Chicago singer with a pedigree — her aunt was blues singer Memphis Minnie. Her big voice helped usher in the rock era on songs like "Soul on Fire." When white covers outsold her originals, she was so infuriated she wrote her congressman and even filed a lawsuit (neither worked). The swinging "Jim Dandy" was one of her sweetest hits.

Appears on: Soul on Fire: The Best of LaVern Baker (Atlantic)


351
Dion, 'Runaround Sue'
Writers: Dion DiMucci, Ernie Maresca
Producer: Gene Schwartz
Released: Sept. '61, Laurie
14 weeks; No. 1

Dion was a country-music fan and member of a gang called the Fordham Baldies when a family friend got him his first record deal. "'Runaround Sue' was created at a neighborhood party," said Dion. This bluesy doo-wop single was Dion’s only Number One. For 47 years, he’s been married to his high school girl, Susan, but he claims the runaround girl was really named Roberta.

Appears on: Runaround Sue (Capitol)

350
Jimmy Cliff, 'The Harder They Come'
Writer: Cliff
Producer: Cliff
Released: March '75, Mango
Did not chart

Before this song, Cliff had already won acclaim: Bob Dylan lauded his 1969 single "Vietnam" as "the best protest song ever written." But Cliff became an international star with this gospel tale of eternal rebellion, expressly written for the movie of the same name, in which he played Ivan Martin, a young man who comes to Kingston, Jamaica, to make his way as a musician.

Appears on: The Harder They Come (Island)


349
The Who, 'Baba O'Riley'
Writer: Pete Townshend
Producers: Glyn Johns, the Who
Released: Aug. '71, MCA
Non-single in U.S.

"Baba O’Riley" (a.k.a. "Teenage Wasteland") takes its name both from Townshend’s spiritual guru, Meher Baba, and minimalist composer Terry Riley, whose work inspired the track’s repetitive electronic textures. The Irish fiddle solo at the end, though, was all Keith Moon’s idea.

Appears on: Who’s Next (MCA)


348
The Supremes, 'You Keep Me Hanging On'
Writers: Brian Holland,Lamont Dozier, Eddie Holland
Producer: Brian Holland, Dozier
Released: Oct. ’66, Motown
12 weeks; No. 1

The stuttering guitar sounds like an SOS, and the distress call only gets louder in Diana Ross’ vocals. HDH had wanted to write a rock song for the Supremes; in 1968, Vanilla Fudge scored with a Top 10 cover.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)


347
Paul McCartney, 'Maybe I'm Amazed'
Writer: McCartney
Producer: McCartney
Released: April '70, Apple
13 weeks; No. 10

"Maybe I’m Amazed" first appeared on McCartney, which Paul made single-handedly (Linda helped with the harmonies) as the Beatles were dissolving. McCartney dedicated it to "me and Linda with the Beatles breaking up. Maybe I’m amazed at what’s going on, maybe I’m not." The song’s biggest success came in 1977, when a live version from Wings Over America went to the Top 10.

Appears on: McCartney (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Paul McCartney


346
Aerosmith, 'Walk This Way'
Writers: Steven Tyler, Joe Perry
Producer: Jack Douglas
Released: Dec. '76, Columbia
17 weeks; No. 10

The inspiration? A Mel Brooks gag from Young Frankenstein. When they saw the film on a late-night break from recording, they laughed so hard that Tyler wrote the lyrics the next day — then left them in the back seat of a cab and had to rewrite them in the stairwell of the studio. Perry fashioned the funky riff in the style of the New Orleans band the Meters so that, as he said, “we don’t have to cover James Brown.”

Appears on: Toys in the Attic (Sony)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Artists: Aerosmith


345
U2, 'Beautiful Day'
Writers: U2
Producers: Daniel Lanois, Brian Eno
Released: Oct. '00, Island
25 weeks; No. 1

The song that re-established U2 as the world’s biggest band almost never saw the light of day: U2 felt the tune — a prayer for transcendence with lyrics inspired by Bono’s work with Jubilee 2000, a group advocating debt relief for poor nations — sounded too much like the band’s Eighties work. "If we’re just chucking it out because it reminds us of U2, that’s not very good," said the Edge.

Appears on: All That You Can’t Leave Behind (Island)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: U2


344
Michael Jackson, 'Beat It'
Writer: Jackson
Producer: Quincy Jones
Released: Dec. '82, Epic
25 weeks; No. 1 

"I wanted to write the type of rock song that I would go out and buy," said Jackson, "but also something totally different from the rock music I was hearing on Top 40 radio." The result was a throbbing dance single with a fingers-flying guitar solo provided by Eddie Van Halen. "I’m not gonna sit here and tell you what to play," Jones instructed Van Halen. "The reason you’re here is because of what you do play."

Appears on: Thriller (Epic)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Michael Jackson's Thriller

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Michael Jackson

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Michael Jackson


343
The Rolling Stones, 'Wild Horses'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: April '71, Rolling Stones
8 weeks; No. 28

Richards wrote this acoustic ballad about leaving his wife, Anita, and young son Marlon as the Stones prepared for their first American tour in three years. Stones sidekick Ian Stewart refused to play the minor chords required, so Memphis musical maverick Jim Dickinson filled in on upright piano at the Muscle Shoals, Alabama, recording session. Jagger’s ex-wife Jerry Hall calls it her favorite Stones song.

Appears on: Sticky Fingers (Virgin)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Rolling Stones' Sticky Fingers

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Rolling Stones


342
The Velvet Underground, 'Sweet Jane'
Writer: Lou Reed
Producers: The Velvet Underground, Shel Kagan, Geoffrey Haslam
Released: Aug. '70, Cotillion
Non-single

After Reed quit the band, a wistful coda was chopped out of this song. "How could anyone be that stupid?" Reed asked RS in 1987. "If I could have stood it, I would have stayed with them and showed them what to do." For years, the only available version of the coda was on the 1969 live LP, but the full "Jane" appears on recent reissues.

Appears on: Loaded (Fully Loaded Edition) (Rhino)


341
Norman Greenbaum, 'Spirit in the Sky'
Writer: Greenbaum
Producer: Erik Jacobsen
Released: Feb. '70, Reprise
15 weeks; No. 3

"I’m just some Jewish musician who really dug gospel music," Greenbaum said. "I decided there was a larger Jesus gospel market out there than a Jehovah one." The crunchy guitar sound came when a friend built a small fuzzbox right into the body of Greenbaum’s Fender Telecaster.

Appears on: Spirit in the Sky (Varese)


340
Bob Dylan, 'Subterranean Homesick Blues'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Tom Wilson
Released: March '65, Columbia
8 weeks; No. 39

"It’s from Chuck Berry, a bit of 'Too Much Monkey Business' and some of the scat songs of the Forties," Dylan said. John Lennon once said of the track that it was so captivating it made him wonder how he could ever compete.

Appears on: Bringing It All Back Home (Sony)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Bob Dylan's Bringing It All Back Home

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan


339
Bonnie Raitt, 'I Can't Make You Love Me'
Writers: Mike Reid, Allen Shamblin
Producers: Don Was, Raitt
Released: Nov. '91, Capitol
20 weeks; No. 18

Raitt was a Seventies blues prodigy who didn’t break through until 1989’s Nick of Time. Two years later came this clear eyed song about love gone cold. Co-author Reid was a defensive tackle for the Cincinnati Bengals before heading off to Nashville. "Of all the songs in my career, that one is the greatest gift," Raitt said. "I think it stands among the best songs ever written."

Appears on: Luck of the Draw (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bonnie Raitt


338
Queen, 'We Will Rock You'
Writers: Brian May, Mike Stone
Producers: Queen
Released: Oct. '77, Elektra
14 weeks; No. 52

In 1977, Sid Vicious wandered into the wrong recording studio and ran into Freddie Mercury sitting at his piano. "Still bringing ballet to the masses, are you?" snarked Sid. "Oh, yes, Mr. Ferocious, dear," Freddie replied. "We are doing our best." Queen soon one-upped the punks with this foot-stomping, conquering-army smash, the B side of "We Are the Champions."

Appears on: News of the World (Hollywood)


337
Earth, Wind and Fire, 'Way of the World'
Writers: Maurice White, Verdine White, Charles Stepney
Producer: Maurice White
Released: March '75, Columbia
16 weeks; No. 12

"Way of the World" was the title song of a little-seen movie starring Harvey Keitel as an idealistic label exec and EWF as the band he wants to produce, rather than white-bread pop acts. The movie was rereleased as Shining Star in 1977, and it flopped again. The song, however, was a Top Five R&B hit in 1975.

Appears on: That’s the Way of the World (Columbia)


336
The Doors, 'The End'
Writers: John Densmore, Robbie Krieger, Ray Manzarek, Jim Morrison
Producer: Paul Rothchild
Released: March '67, Elektra
Non-single

Morrison had worked on a student production of Oedipus Rex at Florida State. But his exploration of its sexual taboos took on bold new life in the 11 minutes of "The End," which evolved during the Doors' live shows at L.A.’s Whisky-A-Go-Go. "Every time I hear that song, it means something else to me," Morrison said in 1969. "It could be goodbye to a kind of childhood."

Appears on: The Doors (Elektra)


335
Jerry Butler and The Impressions, 'For Your Precious Love'
Writers: Arthur Brooks, Butler
Producer: Calvin Carter
Released: June '58, Falcon
12 weeks; No. 11

The spiritual tenor of the vocals came from the Impressions' church roots; Butler and Curtis Mayfield had sung together in the Northern Jubilee Gospel Singers. The lyrics were drawn verbatim from a poem Butler had written in high school. The single’s credit — "Jerry Butler and the Impressions" — caused friction in the group, which Butler soon left.

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Curb)


334
James Brown, 'Get Up (I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine'
Writers: Brown, Bobby Byrd,Ron Lenhoff
Producer: Brown
Released: July '70, King
9 weeks; No. 15

Engineer Lenhoff got co-writing credit mostly because he got out of bed and drove five hours to Nashville to record this duet with former Famous Flame Byrd, which Brown wanted cut pronto.

Appears on: 50th Anniversary Collection (UTV/Polydor)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: James Brown

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: James Brown


333
The Young Rascals, 'Good Lovin''
Writers: Rudy Clark, Arthur Resnick
Producers: Tom Dowd, Arif Mardin
Released: March '66, Atlantic
14 weeks; No. 1 

A soulful New York bar band, the Rascals tried to replicate their jacked-up live rendition of the Olympics' "Good Lovin'" in the studio. "We weren’t too pleased with our performance," singer Felix Cavaliere admitted. "It was a shock to us when it went to the top of the charts."

Appears on: The Very Best of the Rascals (Rhino)


332
The Supremes, 'Baby Love'
Writers: Brian Holland,Lamont Dozier, Eddie Holland
Producers: Brian Holland, Dozier
Released: Sept. '64, Motown
13 weeks; No. 1

Diana Ross wasn’t the strongest vocalist in the Supremes, but as the Motown production team discovered, when she sang in a lower register, her voice worked its sultry magic. When this song was finished, Berry Gordy thought it wasn’t catchy enough and sent the group back into the studio. The result: the smoky "Oooooh" right at the start.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)


331
Patti Smith Group, 'Dancing Barefoot'
Writers: Smith, Ivan Kral
Producer: Todd Rundgren
Released: May '79, Arista
Did not chart

Smith started as a poet and Rolling Stone writer before finding fame as a New York punk priestess. "Dancing Barefoot" is her mystical ode to sexual rapture. "I think sex is one of the five highest sensations one can experience," she said in 1978. "A very high orgasm is a way of communion with our creator." She added that she masturbated to her own album-cover photo, as well as to the Bible.

Appears on: Wave (Arista)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Patti Smith

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Patti Smith


330
Public Enemy, 'Fight the Power'
Writers: Chuck D, Eric Sadler, Hank Shocklee, Keith Shocklee
Producers: Sadler, Hank Shocklee
Released: June '89, Def Jam
Did not chart

The opening credits of Spike Lee’s 1989 Do the Right Thing feature a masterpiece from the Bomb Squad production team: a dissonant call to revolution, with a title borrowed from an Isley Brothers funk hit and a groove lifted from the 1972 B side "Hot Pants Road" by the J.B.’s. Public Enemy direct their rage at Elvis Presley, John Wayne and, er, Bobby McFerrin.

Appears on: Fear of a Black Planet (Def Jam)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Public Enemy's Fear of a Black Planet

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Public Enemy


329
Neil Young, 'Cortez the Killer'
Writer: Young
Producers: Young, David Briggs
Released: Nov. '75, Reprise
Non-single

"It’s weird," Young mused to Rolling Stone in 1975. "I’ve got all these songs about Peru, the Aztecs and the Incas. Time travel stuff." Over a slow, rambling Crazy Horse guitar jam, he mourns the Aztec civilization destroyed by the Spanish conquistadors. The song ends after seven and a half minutes, onlybecause a circuit blew on the recording console. The band went on for another verse.

Appears on: Zuma (Reprise)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Neil Young

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Neil Young

•The 100 Greatest Guitars of All Time: Neil Young


328
Led Zeppelin, 'Heartbreaker'
Writers: Jimmy Page, Robert Plant, John Bonham, John Paul Jones
Producer: Page
Released: Oct. '69, Atlantic
Non-single

"Heartbreaker," like much of Led Zeppelin II, was recorded hit-and-run style on Zep’s 1969 American tour. The awesome swagger captures the debauched mood of the band’s wild early days in L.A. "Nineteen years old and never been kissed," Plant recalled in 1975. "I remember it well. It’s been a long time. Nowadays we’re more into staying in our room and reading Nietzsche."

Appears on: Led Zeppelin II (Atlantic)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Led Zeppelin's II

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Led Zeppelin


327
Franz Ferdinand, 'Take Me Out'
Writers: Alex Kapranos, Nick McCarthy
Producer: Tore Johansson
Released: Feb. '04, Domino
19 weeks; No. 66

"Take Me Out" put Franz Ferdinand at the head of a danceable rockwave. "Clubs [play] a mix of rock and electronic music," singer Kapranos said. "It makes you think that there’s no difference."

Appears on: Franz Ferdinand (Domino)


326
Alice Cooper, 'School's Out'
Writers: Michael Bruce, Glen Buxton, Cooper, Dennis Dunway, Neal Smith
Producer: Bob Ezrin
Released: May '72, Warner Bros.
13 weeks; No. 7

"The few minutes waiting for that final school bell to ring are so intense that when it happens, it’s almost orgasmic," said Cooper. Inspiredby a Forties Dead End Kids film series, the tune will live for as long as kids really, really hate school.

Appears on: School’s Out (Warner Bros.)


325
Jimmy Cliff, 'Many Rivers to Cross'
Writer: Cliff
Producer: Cliff
Released: Dec. '69, A&M
Did not chart

When Jamaican filmmaker Percy Henzell heard "Many Rivers to Cross," a ballad Jimmy Cliff wrote in 1969, he ordered Cliff the lead in his film The Harder They Come. The song, a hymn about struggle and perseverance, summed up the outlaw mood of early reggae. On the strength of his songs and acting in the film,Cliff became one of reggae’s first international stars.

Appears on: Wonderful World, Beautiful People (A&M)


324
Pink Floyd, 'Wish You Were Here'
Writers: David Gilmour, Roger Waters
Producers: Pink Floyd
Released: Sept. '75, Columbia
Non-single

While Pink Floyd were recording this elegy for burned-out ex-frontman Syd Barrett, he mysteriously appeared in the studio in such bad shape that, at first, nobody in the band recognized him. "He stood up and said, 'Right, when do I put my guitar on?'" keyboardist Rick Wright recalled. "And of course, he didn’t have a guitar with him. And we said, 'Sorry, Syd, the guitar’s all done.'"

Appears on: Wish You Were Here (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Pink Floyd's Wish You Were Here


323
Elvis Costello, 'Alison'
Writer: Costello
Producer: Nick Lowe
Released: Nov. '77, Columbia
Did not chart

Some people think "Alison" is a murder ballad. "It isn’t," Costello told Rolling Stone in 2002. "It’s about disappointing somebody. It’s a thin line between love and hate, as the Persuaders sang." Costello’s backup band was Huey Lewis' outfit Clover; Lewis himself didn’t play on the album, presumably because Costello didn’t need any harmonica players.

Appears on: My Aim Is True (Rhino)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Elvis Costello's My Aim Is True

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Costello


322
The Animals, 'Don't Let Me Be Misunderstood'
Writers: Bennie Benjamin, Sol Marcus,Gloria Caldwell
Producer: Mickie Most
Released: Jan. '65, MGM
10 weeks; No. 15

The Animals’ reworking of this song radically departed from Nina Simone’s orchestrated down-tempo original version, recorded the year before. "It was never considered pop material, but it somehow got passed on to us and we fell in love with it," recalled Eric Burdon. Burdon would sometimes perform a slow, Simone-like rendition live.

Appears on: Retrospective (ABKCO)


321
Pink Floyd, 'Comfortably Numb'
Writers: David Gilmour, Roger Waters
Producer: Bob Ezrin
Released: Dec. '79, Columbia
Did not chart

Roger Waters based one of the saddest drug songs ever written on a sleazy Philadelphia doctor who injected him with tranquilizers before a gig when he was suffering from hepatitis. "That was the longest two hours of my life," Waters said. "Trying to do a show when you can hardly lift your arm." Arguably the greatest cover of "Numb": Van Morrison’s 1990 version from The Wall: Live in Berlin concert.

Appears on: The Wall (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Pink Floyd's The Wall


320
Screamin' Jay Hawkins, 'I Put a Spell on You'
Writers: Screamin’ Jay Hawkins, Herb Slotkin
Producer: Arnold Maxin
Released: Sept. '56, OKeh
Did not chart

Former boxer Jalacy J. Hawkins got loaded on muscatel before shrieking out the hoodoo of "Spell on You," and it took a healthy swig of J&B for him to re-create his studio performance onstage, where he climbed outof a coffin. The prop was Alan Freed’s brainstorm; when Hawkins resisted, Freed peeled off three $100 bills. "I said, 'Show me the coffin,'" the singer quipped.

Appears on: Voodoo Jive (Rhino)


319
Roy Orbison, 'In Dreams'
Writers: Joe Melson, Orbison
Producer: Fred Foster
Released: Feb. '63, Monument
13 weeks; No. 7

Orbison claimed the lyrics came to him in a dream; he wrote the music once he woke up. It was a Top 10 hit in the U.S. but even bigger in England. The track made him so popular that Orbison toured the U.K. with an up and-coming opening act called the Beatles. Roy’s reaction: "I’ve never heard of them." Next, he’d tour Australia with the Rolling Stones.

Appears on: For the Lonely: 18 Greatest Hits (Rhino)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Roy Orbison

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Roy Orbison


318
The Everly Brothers, 'Wake Up Little Susie'
Writers: Felice Bryant, Boudleaux Bryant
Producer: Archie Bleyer
Released: Sept. '57, Cadence
26 weeks; No. 1

Though it sounds quaint today, "Wake Up Little Susie," the tale of a teen couple who fall asleep at a drive-in, stirred up controversy in 1957: It was banned in Boston but became the Everlys’ first Number One. In 2000, when candidate George W. Bush was asked by Oprah Winfrey what his favorite song was, he said, "'Wake Up Little Susie,' by Buddy Holly."

Appears on: The Best of the Everly Brothers (Rhino)


317
Black Sabbath, 'Iron Man'
Writers: Black Sabbath
Producer: Roger Bain
Released: Feb. '71, Warner
10 weeks; No. 52

When an accident left guitarist Tony Iommi without the tips of two fingers, it seemed like the end of the road for Black Sabbath. But, inspired by the great, handicapped guitarist Django Reinhardt, Iommi fashioned thimbles out of plastic, and developed a heavy playing style that would define metal forever.

Appears on: Paranoid (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Black Sabbath


316
Tina Turner, 'What's Love Got to Do With It'
Writers: Terry Britten, Graham Lyle
Producer: Britten
Released: June '84, Capitol
28 weeks; No. 1

At first, Turner thought "Love" was "wimpy." So Britten plugged in his guitar and roughed up the tune. It was Tina’s first Number One.

Appears on: Private Dancer (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Tina Turner

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Tina Turner


315
Jackie Wilson, 'Lonely Teardrops'
Writers: Berry Gordy, Gwen Gordy, Tyran Carlo
Producer: Dick Jacobs
Released: Nov. '58, Brunswick
21 weeks; No. 7 

One of the first hits written by Motown founder Gordy, "Lonely Teardrops" set Wilson’s pleading vocals over Latin rhythms. At a New Jersey casino in September 1975, Wilson collapsed from a heart attack on stage in the middle of singing "Lonely Teardrops" — right at the line "My heart is crying." He sank into a coma and died in 1984.

Appears on: The Greatest Hits of Jackie Wilson (Brunswick)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Jackie Wilson

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jackie Wilson


314
Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers, 'Why Do Fools Fall In Love'
Writers: Lymon, Morris Levy
Producer: George Goldner
Released: Jan. '56, Gee
21 weeks; No. 6

Frankie Lymon was one of rock & roll’s first teen prodigies — and one of its earliest tragedies. Lymon wrote and sang this hit as a 13-year-old Harlem kid. But the writing credit — and money — went to his label boss, Levy, an associate of the Genovese family. Lymon died a penniless heroin addict in 1968 at the age of 25.

Appears on: The Best of Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers (Rhino)


313
The Jam, 'That's Entertainment'
Writer: Paul Weller
Producers: Vic Coppersmith-Heaven, the Jam
Released: Nov. '80, Polydor
Non-single in the U.S.

The Jam had a long run of U.K. hits with their mod guitar flash – but they were too defiantly British for U.S. success. The lads hit hardest with this acoustic lament, with Weller brooding over the heartaches of everyday working-class life. His songwriting technique? "Coming home pissed from the pub and writing 'That’s Entertainment' in 10 minutes."

Appears on: Sound Affects (Polygram)


312
James Brown, 'Say It Loud - I'm Black and I'm Proud'
Writers: Brown, Pee Wee Ellis
Producer: Brown
Released: Sept. '68, King
11 weeks; No. 10

In 1968, Brown traded his processed 'do for an Afro and started writing songs like this anthem. The real stars are Clyde Stubblefield on drums and the L.A. kids — mostly white and Asian-American — yelling, "I’mblack and I’m proud."

Appears on: 50th Anniversary Collection (UTV/Polydor)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: James Brown

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: James Brown


311
The Beatles, 'With a Little Help From My Friends'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: June '67, Capitol
Non-single

As fictional crooner Billy Shears, Ringo Starr delivers his most charming vocals on this tune. "Ringo’s got a great sentimental thing," McCartney said. "I suppose that’s why we write these sorts of songs for him."

Appears on: Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band (Apple/Capitol)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band


310
The Rolling Stones, 'Ruby Tuesday'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Andrew Loog Oldham
Released: Jan. '67, London
12 weeks; No. 1

At a session for Between the Buttons in November 1966, Richards drew this lyrical sketch of Linda Keith, his first serious girlfriend, and turned it into an uncharacteristically wistful ballad. Brian Jones played the recorder on the track, giving the song a madrigal feel. The countermelody was played by Bill Wyman, who fingered the strings on a cello while Richards bowed them.

Appears on: Between the Buttons (ABKCO)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Rolling Stones' Between the Buttons

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Rolling Stones


309
Willie Nelson, 'Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain'
Writer: Fred Rose
Producer: Nelson
Released: July '75, Columbia
18 weeks; No. 21

Nelson had gotten his start writing hits like "Crazy" for Patsy Cline, but his own breakthrough was a cover of an old country standard written by Rose in 1945 and originally recorded by Roy Acuff. Delivered with Nelson’s jazz-singer phrasing, it’s the beating heart of Red Headed Stranger, his 1975 concept album about love and death in the Old West.

Appears on: Red Headed Stranger (Sony)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Willie Nelson


308
Rod Stewart, 'Da Ya Think I'm Sexy?'
Writers: Stewart, Carmine Appice
Producer: Tom Dowd
Released: Dec. '78, Warner Bros.
21 weeks; No. 1

In that rock-disco moment that also yielded the Stones' "Miss You," Stewart's entry was a tale of lust at first sight with an irresistible hook. But that hook actually wasn’t by Stewart and Appice. It came from "Taj Mahal," by the Brazilian songwriter Jorge Ben. After Ben won a plagiarism lawsuit, royalties for the song went to UNICEF.

Appears on: Blondes Have More Fun (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Rod Stewart


307
Daft Punk, 'One More Time'
Writers: Thomas Bangalter, Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo, Anthony Moore
Producer: Daft Punk
Released: Nov. '00, Virgin
16 weeks; No. 61

Some critics panned the use of a vocoder on this dance-floor epiphany, a tribute to '70s disco. But "One More Time" kicked off the Auto-Tune revolution that would dominate pop in the 2000s. "The healthy thing is that people either loved it or hated it,"said Daft Punk’s Bangalter. "The worst thing is when you make art and people are not moved."

Appears on: Discovery (Virgin)


306
Madonna, 'Like A Prayer'
Writers: Madonna, Patrick Leonard
Producers: Madonna, Leonard
Released: March '89, Sire
16 weeks; No. 1

In a voice full of Catholic angst and disco thunder, Madonna turned 30 and closed the book on her first marriage. "I didn’t have the censors on me in terms of emotions or music," Madonna said. "I did take a lot more chances with this one, but obviously success gives you the confidence to do those things." The obligatory controversial video featured burning crosses, black lingerie and masturbation in church.

Appears on: Like a Prayer (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Madonna's Like A Prayer

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Madonna


305
Blondie, 'One Way or Another'
Writers: Deborah Harry, Nigel Harrison
Producer: Mike Chapman
Released: Sept. '78, Chrysalis
14 weeks; No. 24

Blondie were already stars in Europe, but they didn’t blow up here until their hit-packed third disc. "One Way" was Harry’s ode to obsessive lust, mixing the girl-group sound with the attack of the Ramones.

Appears on:  Parallel Lines (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Blondie's Parallel Lines


304
Prince, 'Sign 'O' The Times'
Writer: Prince
Producer: Prince
Released: March '87, Paisley Park
14 weeks; No. 3

When Prince broke with his longtime group the Revolution, he aborted an ambitious, 18-song project called Dream Factory. One of the songs from those sessions served as the title track for Sign 'O' the Times. A stark socio-political talking blues written by Prince using the pre-programmed sounds on his synth, it brought Sly Stone-like realism to Eighties pop radio.

Appears on: Sign 'O' the Times (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Prince's Sign 'O' the Times

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Prince

•The Top 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Prince


303
Neil Young, 'Heart of Gold'
Writer: Young
Producers: Elliot Mazer, Young
Released: Feb '72, Reprise
14 weeks; No. 1

Before he started Harvest, in 1971, Young suffered a slipped disc and spent two years in and out of hospitals: "I couldn’t physically play an electric guitar," he told Rolling Stone. So he cut a collection of mellow tracks while he was in Nashville to appearon Johnny Cash’s variety show, with a crew of local session players. The yearning "Heart of Gold" is Young’s only Number One hit.

Appears on: Harvest (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Neil Young

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Neil Young

•The 100 Greatest Guitars of All Time: Neil Young


302
Bob Marley and the Wailers, 'Get Up, Stand Up'
Writers: Bob Marley, Peter Tosh
Producer: Chris Blackwell
Released: Nov. '75, Island
Did not chart

The song’s chorus ("Stand up for your right . . ./Don’t give up the fight") sounds like a political anthem, which is how Amnesty International still employs it at rallies. But the lyrics are actually rooted in Rastafarian theology, about not being pacified by promises of the afterlife. The Wailers, of course, were far from placated, especially Tosh, who sings the fire-breathing final verse.

Appears on: Legend (Island)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Bob Marley's Legend

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Marley

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Marley


301
The Rolling Stones, 'Street Fighting Man'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: Aug. '68, London
6 weeks; No. 48

The Stones' most political song came about after Jagger went to a March 1968 anti-war rally at London's U.S. embassy, with mounted police wading into a crowd of 25,000. The distorted drone was built on acoustic guitars pumped through a mono cassette recorder.

Appears on: Beggars Banquet (ABKCO)

300
Led Zeppelin, 'Black Dog'
Writers: Jimmy Page, Robert Plant, John Paul Jones
Producer: Page
Released: Nov. '71, Atlantic
12 weeks; No. 15

A dog meandering the grounds outside Zeppelin’s studio in rural England inspired the title, but the subject was honey-dripping sex. "Things like 'Black Dog' are blatant let’s-do-it-in-the-bath-type things," Plant said, "but they make their point."

Appears on: Led Zeppelin IV (Atlantic)

RELATED:

•The Top 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Led Zeppelin's IV

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Led Zeppelin


299
Al Green, 'Tired of Being Alone'
Writer: Green
Producers: Willie Mitchell, Green
Released: July '71, Hi
19 weeks; No. 11

After a show in Detroit, Green woke up before dawn the next day at a motel in rural Michigan with a song forming in his mind. Half an hour later, he had "Tired of Being Alone." But Mitchell wasn’t much interested in Green's own material. "I was toting my song around in my pocket for days on end, saying, 'Hey, I got a song,'" Green said. "Finally, at the end of the session, I said, 'Well, I still got a song.'"

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Al Green's Greatest Hits

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Al Green

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Al Green


298
The Clash, 'Train in Vain'
Writers: Mick Jones, Joe Strummer
Producer: Guy Stevens
Released: Dec. '79, Epic
14 weeks; No. 23

"Train In Vain" was the hidden track at the end of the Clash's London Calling, unlisted on the sleeve or on the label. It didn’t even have a proper title; fans initially assumed it was called "Stand by Me," after the chorus. But it became a surprise hit in America, thanks to its hard-charging drums and weary vocals from guitarist Jones, who wrote the bitter love song in his grandmother’s flat.

Appears on: London Calling (Epic)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Clash's London Calling


297
The Zombies, 'She's Not There'
Writer: Rod Argent
Producer: Ken Jones
Released: Oct. '64, Parrot
15 weeks; No. 2 

With Colin Blunstone’s gauzy vocals and Argent’s scampering piano, "She’s Not There" was one of the British Invasion’s jazziest singles. Argent was a fan of Elvis and the Beatles, but also Miles Davis, who became a subconscious influence. "When I wrote and played 'She’s Not There,' the last thing on my mind was jazz or Miles," says Argent, "but those things filtered through."

Appears on: British Invasion: 1963-1967 (Hip-O)


296
Eminem feat. Dido, 'Stan'
Writers: Marshall Mathers,D. Armstrong, P. Herman
Producers: Eminem, the 45 King
Released: March '00, Aftermath
15 weeks; No. 51

"Stan" was Eminem’s scariest song, because for once the horror seemed real. Anchored by a sample from Dido’s "Thank You" (which became a hit itself), it followed an obsessed fan who acts out Em's fantasies. "He’s crazy for real, and he thinks I’m crazy, but I try to help him at the end of the song," said Eminem. "It kinda shows the real side of me."

Appears on: The Marshall Mathers LP (Aftermath/Interscope)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Eminem


295
The Beatles, 'Can't Buy Me Love'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: March '64, Capitol
10 weeks; No. 1

"'Can’t Buy Me Love' is my attempt to write [in] a bluesy mode," McCartney said. He wrote it while the band was doing concerts in Paris for 18 days straight, two or three shows a day. The single was released a few months later, at the height of Beatlemania. When it hit Number One, the band occupied all five top positions on the American charts.

Appears on: A Hard Day’s Night (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beatles' A Hard Day's Night


294
Barrett Strong, 'Money (That's What I Want)'
Writers: Berry Gordy, Janie Bradford
Producer: Gordy
Released: Jan. '60, Anna
17 weeks; No. 23

The sessions lasted more than 40 takes and several days, but Gordy didn’t care: It was the first song cut in his Hitsville USA studio, and there were no bills to pay. With a howling vocal over a live band, this was gutbucket R&B, far more raw than the Motown hits that followed. But when it became Gordy’s first hit, it provided the money to pay for them.

Appears on: Motown: The Classic Years (Polygram)


293
Run-DMC, 'Walk This Way'
Writers: Steven Tyler, Joe Perry
Producers: Rick Rubin,Russell Simmons
Released: May '86, Profile
16 weeks; No. 4

Run-DMC pioneered the use of rock guitar in hip-hop with the tracks "Rock Box" and "King of Rock." But this Aerosmith cover — with help from Tyler and Perry — was a crossover smash, establishing a blueprint for scores of metal-rap mash-ups. For Run, though, it was just another day rhyming. "I made that record because I used to rap over it when I was 12," he told Rolling Stone.

Appears on: Raising Hell (Arista)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Run-DMC's Raising Hell

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Run-DMC


292
Pavement, 'Summer Babe (Winter Version)'
Writer: Stephen Malkmus
Producers: Malkmus, Scott Kannberg
Released: April '92, Drag City
Did not chart

Malkmus and Kannberg cut this tender pop tune about a summer crush in the garage studio of their hippie drummer, Gary Young. "We didn’t know how to record," Malkmus confessed. "We used reverb on the drums — the cheapest, worst reverb ever." Malkmus said he was trying to sound like Lou Reed, singing about "sad boy stuff."

Appears on: Slanted and Enchanted (Matador)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Pavement's Slanted and Enchanted


291
Howlin' Wolf, 'Smokestack Lightning'
Writer: Chester Burnett
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess, Willie Dixon
Released: March '56, Chess
Did not chart 

This was based on Wolf’s "Crying at Daybreak," recorded years earlier and itself modeled on Charley Patton’s "Moon Going Down." The inspiration, said Wolf, was watching trains cut through the night: "We used to sit out in the country and see the trains go by, watch the sparks come out of the smokestack. That was smokestack lightning."

Appears on: His Best (Chess)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Howlin' Wolf

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Howlin' Wolf


290
Elvis Costello and the Attractions, '(What's So Funny About) Peace, Love and Understanding'
Writer: Nick Lowe
Producer: Lowe
Released: Jan. '79, Columbia
Non-single

"What’s So Funny" was written by Lowe, Costello’s pal and producer. The original, by Lowe’s country-rock band Brinsley Schwartz, was mellow and cute, but Costello snarls the song intensely enough to make the title question seem brand-new, with thundering drums and droning piano. It’s like Abba playing punk rock.

Appears on: Armed Forces (Rhino)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Costello


289
Blondie, 'Call Me'
Writers: Giorgio Moroder, Deborah Harry
Producer: Moroder
Released: Feb. '80, Chrysalis
25 weeks; No. 1 

The main reason Blondie recorded "Call Me" for the Richard Gere flick American Gigolo was to work with their hero, Euro-disco producer Moroder. "He was the king of disco," Harry said. "And we were still the anti-establishment invaders." Moroder’s first choice for a vocalist was Stevie Nicks, but Harry’s New Wave edge helped make the song the biggest seller of 1980.

Appears on: Best of Blondie (Chrysalis)


288
Joni Mitchell, 'Help Me'
Writer: Mitchell
Producer: Mitchell
Released: Feb. '74, Asylum
19 weeks; No. 7

"I had attempted to play my music with rock & roll players," Mitchell said in 1979. "They’d laugh, 'Aww, isn’t that cute? She’s trying to tell us how to play.'" It took a jazz group — Tom Scott’s L.A. Express — to realize her biggest hit, a swooning confession of love trouble complete with swirling sax break. One rocker, Prince, loved the song so much he quoted it on "The Ballad of Dorothy Parker."

Appears on: Court and Spark (Elektra)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Joni Mitchell

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Joni Mitchell


287
Stevie Wonder, 'You Are the Sunshine of My Life'
Writer: Wonder
Producer: Wonder
Released: Nov. '72, Tamla
17 weeks; No. 1

Wonder originally wrote and recorded "Sunshine" while he was finishing his 1972 LP Music of My Mind, but he decided to hang on to it until his next album, Talking Book. He had written the song for future wife Syreeta Wright, who had met Wonder at the Motown offices, where she was a secretary. The cut was Talking Book’s second Number One hit, following "Superstition."

Appears on: Talking Book (Tamla)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Stevie Wonder's Talking Book

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Stevie Wonder

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Stevie Wonder


286
The White Stripes, 'Seven Nation Army'
Writer: Jack White
Producer: White
Released: April '03, V2/Third Man

Jack White used an effects pedal to make his guitar sound like a bass for this howling anthem about rage and paranoia. The result was the greatest riff of the 2000s and a massive, career-changing hit that has been covered by everyone from Metallica to the University of South Alabama marching band. As for the title, "That’s what I called the Salvation Army when I was a kid," White told Rolling Stone.

Appears on: Elephant (V2/Third Man)


285
Bill Withers, 'Ain't No Sunshine'
Writer: Withers
Producer: Booker T. Jones
Released: July '71, Sussex
16 weeks; No. 3

When the 31-year-old Withers recorded "Sunshine," he was still working at a factory making toilet seats for 747s. He intended to write more lyrics for the part where he repeats the phrase "I know" 26 times, but the other musicians told him to leave it.

Appears on: Lean on Me: The Best of Bill Withers (Columbia/Legacy)


284
The Dixie Cups, 'Chapel of Love'
Writers: Jeff Barry, Ellie Greenwich, Phil Spector
Producers: Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller, Barry, Greenwich
Released: June '64, Red Bird
13 weeks; No. 1

Spector took two cracks at recording "Chapel," but the Ronettes and Crystals left him flat. Leiber and Stoller took it to the novice Dixie Cups; the hopeful harmonies were just what the nuptial ditty called for.

Appears on: The Best of the Girl Groups, Vol. 1 (Rhino)


283
The Cure, 'Pictures of You'
Writers: Robert Smith, Simon Gallup, Boris Williams, Porl Thompson, Roger O'Donnell, Lol Tolhurst
Producers: Smith, David M. Allen
Released: May '89, Elektra
8 weeks; No. 71

"Most love songs are just calculated attempts at commercial exploitation — they’re not anything to do with love as I understand it," said Cure leader Smith. After the relatively cheerful pop songs of Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me, he wanted to write the Cure’s heaviest songs yet. With this epic of cascading synths and broken dreams, he succeeded.

Appears on: Disintegration (Elektra)


282
David Bowie, 'Ziggy Stardust'
Writer: Bowie
Producers: Ken Scott, Bowie
Released: June '72, RCA
Non-single

"I wasn’t at all surprised 'Ziggy Stardust' made my career," Bowie told Rolling Stone. "I packaged a totally credible plastic rock star." This glam power ballad told the story of his most famous alter ego over Mick Ronson’s flash guitars. Bowie and Ziggy became so inextricably linked that Bowie’s over-the-top manager, Tony Defries, demanded that all his employees get Ziggy haircuts.

Appears on: The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders From Mars (Virgin)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: David Bowie's The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders From Mars

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: David Bowie

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: David Bowie


281
The Staple Singers, I'll Take You There
Writer: Alvertis Isbell (Al Bell)
Producer: Bell
Released: June '72, Stax
15 weeks; No. 1

It was a good day’s work at Stax in 1971 when the Staples cut both "Respect Yourself" and "I’ll Take You There." The latter — a funk vamp promising heavenly or sexual devotion, depending on your perspective — was "written on the spot," said bassist David Hood. "We always tried to do material that was inspirational," said Roebuck "Pop" Staples, "in addition to whatever else it was."

Appears on: Bealtitude: Respect Yourself (Stax)


280
Bruce Springsteen, 'Born in the U.S.A.'
Writer: Springsteen
Producers: Springsteen, Jon Landau, Chuck Plotkin, Steve Van Zandt
Released: June '84, Columbia
17 weeks; No. 9

Before it became the centerpiece of Springsteen’s biggest album, "U.S.A." was an acoustic protest song meant for Nebraska. But when Springsteen revived it with the E Street Band, Roy Bittan came up with a huge synth riff, and Max Weinberg hammered out a beat like he was using M-80s for drumsticks. "We played it two times, and our second take is the record," Springsteen said.

Appears on: Born in the U.S.A. (Columbia)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Bruce Springsteen's Born in the U.S.A.

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bruce Springsteen

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bruce Springsteen


279
Jefferson Airplane, 'Somebody to Love'
Writer: Darby Slick
Producer: Rick Jarrard
Released: Feb. '67, RCA
15 weeks; No. 5

"Somebody" was about "doubt and disillusionment," according to Darby Slick, who wrote it in the Great Society. His sister-in-law Grace brought the song to the Airplane, whose hard-edged rendition became one of the S.F. scene’s first hits. The Airplane made buttons that read jefferson airplane loves you; Great Society countered with ones that said the great society really doesn’t like you much at all.

Appears on: Surrealistic Pillow (RCA)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Jefferson Airplane's Surrealistic Pillow


278
The Beatles, 'Something'
Writer: George Harrison
Producer: George Martin
Released: Oct. '69, Apple
16 weeks; No. 3

Harrison wrote “Something” near the end of the White Album sessions (one placeholder lyric: "Something in the way she moves/Attracts me like a cauliflower"). It was too late to squeeze it onto the disc, so he gave it to Joe Cocker. The Beatles cut a new version the next year with a string section, which would become a standard recorded by everyone from Frank Sinatra to Ray Charles.

Appears on: Abbey Road (Apple)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beatles' Abbey Road

•The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: George Harrison


277
Chuck Berry, 'Sweet Little Sixteen'
Writer: Berry
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess
Released: Jan. '58, Chess
16 weeks; No. 2

"Sixteen" celebrated kids, America, and the power of rock & roll — an ode to an underage rock fan in high-heeled shoes that included a roll call of U.S. cities. The Beach Boys fitted the song with new words and called it "Surfin’ U.S.A."; Berry threatened to sue and won a writing credit.

Appears on: The Anthology (Chess)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Chuck Berry

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Chuck Berry

•The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Chuck Berry


276
The Beach Boys, 'Sloop John B'
Writer: Traditional, Brian Wilson
Producer: Wilson
Released: March '66, Capitol
11 weeks; No. 3

Wilson got turned onto the Bahamian folk song "The Wreck of the John B." by Al Jardine. For the Boys' version, Wilson added elaborate vocals and Billy Strange's 12-string-guitar part. He also changed "This is the worst trip since I’ve been born" to ". . . I’ve ever been on" — a wink to acid culture.

Appears on: Pet Sounds (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beach Boys' Pet Sounds

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beach Boys


275
George Jones, 'He Stopped Loving Her Today'
Writers: Bobby Braddock,Curly Putnam
Producer: Billy Sherrill
Released: March '80, Epic
Did not chart 

Dogged by alcohol problems, debt and a messy divorce, former country star Jones was set for a comeback after he left rehab in 1980. So he recorded one of his great heartbreak ballads, a tune about a man whose devotion ends with his death. Jones' nuanced performance was a hit on the country charts and won him a Grammy.

Appears on: I Am What I Am (Epic/Legacy)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: George Jones


274
The Modern Lovers, 'Roadrunner'
Writer: Jonathan Richman
Producer: John Cale
Released: Oct. '76, Beserkley
Did not chart 

Boston native Richman was obsessed with the Velvet Underground; when he started his own band, he rewrote the Velvets' "Sister Ray" into an ecstatic two-chord tribute to cruising down the highway with the radio on. This 1972 recording (featuring future members of Talking Heads and the Cars) wasn’t released for more than three years – whereupon English punks fell in love with it.

Appears on: The Modern Lovers (Rhino)


273
Kanye West, 'Jesus Walks'
Writers: Kanye West, Rhymefest
Producer: West
Released: Feb. '04, Roc-a-Fella
25 weeks; No. 11

"If I talk about God, my record won’t get played," West rapped on "Jesus Walks," a gospel testimonial that samples the ARC Choir, a Harlem group composed of recovering drug addicts. Kanye was wrong: The song, in which the colossally cocky West admits that he needs Jesus "like Kathie Lee needs Regis," blew up on the charts, making it the rare pop hit to name-check the Messiah.

Appears on: The College Dropout (Roc-a-Fella)


272
U2, 'Sunday Bloody Sunday'
Writers: Bono, the Edge, Adam Clayton, Larry Mullen Jr.
Producer: Steve Lillywhite
Released: March '83, Island
Did not chart 

This rallying cry set to a military beat was inspired by two Sunday massacres in the ongoing civil war between Irish Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland. The band changed the song’s opening line from "Don’t talk to me about the rights of the IRA" to "I can’t believe the news today" out of fear that its plea for peace would be misconstrued.

Appears on: War (Island)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: U2's War

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: U2


271
New York Dolls, 'Personality Crisis'
Writers: David Johansen, Johnny Thunders
Producer: Todd Rundgren
Released: Aug. '73, Mercury
Did not chart

No song better captured the New York Dolls' glammed-out R&B than "Personality Crisis," the opening track on the group’s debut. Produced by Todd Rundgren during an eight-day session, "Crisis" was the trashy sound of a meltdown ("Frustration and heartache is what you got"); soon after, the Dolls fell victim to one themselves and dissolved amid a haze of drugs.

Appears on: New York Dolls (Mercury)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: New York Dolls' New York Dolls


270
Archie Bell and The Drells, 'Tighten Up'
Writers: Bell, Billy Butler
Producer: Skipper Lee Frazier
Released: March '68, Atlantic
15 weeks; No. 1

After Bell got his draft notice in May '67, he wanted to record with his group, the Drells, before he got shipped off to Vietnam. He pulled out "Tighten Up," one of the group’s old demos. Bell got shot in the leg in Vietnam; the record went to Number One while he was in a military hospital, trying to convince people the song on the radio was his.

Appears on: Tightening It Up: The Best of Archie Bell and the Drells (Rhino)


269
The Ronettes, 'Walking in the Rain'
Writers: Barry Mann, Cynthia Weil, Phil Spector
Producer: Spector
Released: Oct. '64, Philles
11 weeks; No. 23

Just as the first wave of British Invasion bands threatened to overtake Spector at the top of the pop charts, the producer responded with "Walking in the Rain." The dreamy ballad features Veronica "Ronnie" Bennett singing lead. She nailed the vocal on the first take — unheard of in Spector’s world. Bennett and Spector were married two years later.

Appears on: The Best of the Ronettes (ABKCO)


268
Randy Newman, 'Sail Away'
Writer: Newman
Producer: Lenny Waronker
Released: June '72, Reprise
Did not chart

Singers from Ray Charles to Etta James covered this portrait of America from the perspective of a slave trader. As usual for Newman, it combines lush melody with painful satire. "One thing with my music," he said, "you can’t sit and eat potato chips, and have it on in the background at a party."

Appears on: Sail Away (Rhino)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Randy Newman's Sail Away


267
The Crystals, 'He's A Rebel'
Writer: Gene Pitney
Producer: Phil Spector
Released: Aug. '62, Philles
18 weeks; No. 1

The Crystals were from Brooklyn, but Spector was in Los Angeles to record "He’s a Rebel." So he recorded this celebration of teenage bad boys with Darlene Love and the Blossoms under the Crystals name. A sobering footnote: Spector was just 21 years old.

Appears on: Best of the Crystals (ABKCO)


266
Smokey Robinson and The Miracles, 'Ooo Baby Baby'
Writers: Robinson, Warren Moore
Producer: Robinson
Released: March '65, Tamla
11 weeks; No. 16

Robinson called this ballad his "national anthem," noting, "Wherever we go, it’s the one song that everybody asks for." "Baby" has what may be his most delicate and wounded vocal. When Robinson sighs the line "I’m crying," it’s a reminder that no matter how many vocalists keep covering his songs, nobody sings Smokey like Smokey.

Appears on: Ooo Baby Baby: The Anthology (Motown)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Smokey Robinson

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Smokey Robinson


265
Stevie Wonder, 'Higher Ground'
Writer: Wonder
Producer: Wonder
Released: Aug. '73, Tamla
14 weeks; No. 4

Wonder wrote, produced and played every instrument on "Higher Ground," which was recorded just before he was involved in a near-fatal car accident in August '73 — no, he wasn’t driving — that left him in a coma. Early in Wonder’s recovery, his road manager tried to revive him by singing the melody of "Ground" into the singer’s ear; Wonder responded by moving his fingers with the music.

Appears on: Innervisions (Motown)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Stevie Wonder's Innversions

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Stevie Wonder

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Stevie Wonder


264
Jeff Buckley, 'Hallelujah'
Writer: Leonard Cohen
Producer: Andy Wallace
Released: Aug. '94, Columbia
Non-Single

During his famed early gigs at the New York club Sin-é, Buckley used to break hearts with his version of this Cohen prayer. Buckley called it a homage to "the hallelujah of the orgasm" and had misgivings about his sensuous rendition: "I hope Leonard doesn’t hear it." On his posthumous live album Mystery White Boy, Buckley turns "Hallelujah" into a medley with the Smiths' "I Know It’s Over."

Appears on: Grace (Columbia)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Jeff Buckley's Grace

•The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Jeff Buckley


263
The Dells, 'Oh, What A Night'
Writers: Marvin Junior, John Funches
Producer: Bobby Miller
Released: Aug. '69, Cadet
11 weeks; No. 10

Pioneering Chicago R&B quintet the Dells scored a regional hit with this song in 1956. But bass vocalist Chuck Barksdale wasn’t on the record, so 13 years later, he persuaded the group to remake "Night" — and included his own opening monologue, along with a more sumptuous groove, an eerie guitar stab and heart-stopping strings. "I think a little ego got involved there," he said.

Appears on: Ultimate Collection (Hip-O)


262
The Who, 'I Can See For Miles'
Writer: Pete Townshend
Producer: Kit Lambert
Released: Oct. '67, Decca
11 weeks; No. 9

"I sat down and made it good from the beginning," Townshend said of the Who’s most volcanic studio single in his first Rolling Stone interview. Written in 1966, "Miles" was painstakingly built in London and L.A. on rare days off from touring in the summer of '67, with Townshend piling on multiple guitars to replicate his onstage amp howl. That fury powered the song into the U.S. Top 10.

Appears on: The Who Sell Out (MCA)


261
The Troggs, 'Wild Thing'
Writer: Chip Taylor
Producer: Larry Page
Released: June '66, Atco/Fontana
11 weeks; No. 1

When Taylor demo’d this three-chord monster in 1965, he didn’t take it too seriously: "I was on the floor laughing when I was through." But after a new U.K. band called the Troggs got hold of it, "Wild Thing" became a bar-band standard. Said Taylor, "It’s still inspired, even in its own dumbness."

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Prime Cuts)


260
Bob Dylan, 'Mississippi'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Jack Frost
Released: Sept. '01, Columbia
Non-Single

Dylan first recorded "Mississippi" for 1997’s Time Out of Mind, but he hated producer Daniel Lanois’ busy arrangement. This version, produced pseudonymously by Dylan, has a sturdy, straightforward groove. "Polyrhythm doesn’t work for knifelike lyrics about majesty and heroism," he said.

Appears on: Love and Theft (Columbia)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Bob Dylan's Love and Theft

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan


259
Blondie, 'Heart of Glass'
Writers: Deborah Harry, Chris Stein
Producer: Mike Chapman
Released: Sept. '78, Chrysalis
21 weeks; No. 1 

Blondie singer Harry and guitarist Stein, her boyfriend, wrote the song as "Once I Had a Love" in their dingy New York apartment; keyboardist Jimmy Destri provided the synthesizer hook. The result brought punk and disco together on the dance floor. "Chris always wanted to do disco," Destri said. Not all of their rock fans agreed. "We used to do 'Heart of Glass' to upset people," he added.

Appears on: Parallel Lines (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Blondie's Parallel Lines


258
AC/DC, 'Highway to Hell'
Writers: Angus Young, Malcolm Young, Bon Scott
Producer: Robert John Lange
Released: Aug. '79, Atlantic
10 weeks; No. 47 

"I’ve been on the road for 13 years," AC/DC singer Scott said in 1978. "Planes, hotels, groupies, booze . . . they all scrape something from you." Pumped up by producer "Mutt" Lange, "Highway" is the last will and testament of Scott: When he yells, "Don’t stop me," right before Angus Young’s guitar solo, it’s clear that no one could – he drank himself to death in 1980.

Appears on: Highway to Hell (Atlantic)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: AC/DC


257
Radiohead, 'Paranoid Android'
Writer: Thom Yorke
Producers: Nigel Godrich, Radiohead
Released: May '97, Capitol
Did not chart 

"'Paranoid Android' is about the dullest fucking people on Earth," said singer Yorke, referring to lyrics such as "Squealing Gucci little piggy," about a creepy coked-out woman he once spied at an L.A. bar. The sound was just as unnerving: a shape-shifting three-part prog-rock suite. Spooky fact: It was recorded in actress Jane Seymour’s 15th-century mansion, a house that Yorke was convinced was haunted.

Appears on: OK Computer (Capitol)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Radiohead

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Radiohead's OK Computer


256
Mott the Hoople, 'All the Young Dudes'
Writer: David Bowie
Producer: Bowie
Released: July ’72, Columbia
11 weeks; No. 37 

U.K. hard-rock band Hoople had already passed up "Suffragette City," so they didn’t say no when Bowie offered to let them record "Dudes," the ultimate glam-rock hymn. "I’m thinking, 'He wants to give us that?'" said drummer Dale Griffin. "'He must be crazy!'" Ian Hunter made it anthemic, contrary to the writer’s apocalyptic intent. "[It’s] about the news," Bowie told RS. "It’s no hymn to the youth."

Appears on: All the Young Dudes (Columbia)

RELATED:

•The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Mott the Hoople's All the Young Dudes


255
Bobby Darin, 'Mack the Knife'
Writers: Marc Blitzstein, Bertolt Brecht, Kurt Weill
Producer: Ahmet Ertegun
Released: March '59, Atco
26 weeks; No. 1 

Darin first hit in 1958 with the rock & roll bathtub classic "Splish Splash." But he changed his image with this hepcat version of a morbid tale from Weill’s Threepenny Opera, which dates back to 1928. Darin came on as a finger-snapping sophisticate at home in the cocktail lounge, scatting over a jazzy groove; it was easy to forget he was singing about a bloodthirsty Berlin gangster.

Appears on: That’s All (Atlantic)


254
The Drifters, 'Money Honey'
Writer: Jesse Stone
Producers: Ahmet Ertegun, Jerry Wexler
Released: Sept.'53, Atlantic

The Drifters were a tough R&B group led by the great soul singer Clyde McPhatter. After McPhatter got drafted in 1954, the Drifters enjoyed pop success with a totally different lineup. Sadly, McPhatter drank himself to death in 1972, before reaching 40.

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Curb)


253
Black Sabbath, 'Paranoid'
Writers: Geezer Butler, Tony Iommi, Ozzy Osbourne, William Ward
Producer: Rodger Bain
Released: Nov. '70, Warner Bros.
8 weeks; No. 61 

After Sabbath’s first U.S. tour, Iommi was at Regent Studios in London trying to write one more song for their next album. "I started fiddling about on the guitar and came up with this riff," he said. "When the others came back [from lunch], we recorded it on the spot."

Appears on: Paranoid (Castle)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Black Sabbath


252
Aretha Franklin, 'Chain of Fools'
Writer: Don Covay
Producer: Jerry Wexler
Released: Nov. '67, Atlantic
12 weeks; No. 2 

The second of four hits from 1968’s Lady Soul, this kissoff was written by Covay as a straight blues about field hands in the South. Covay reworked the lyrics for Franklin; producer Wexler cooked up the propulsive stomp. When songwriter Ellie Greenwich heard the track in Wexler’s office, she suggested an extra vocal-harmony part, which Wexler got her to sing on the final master.

Appears on: Lady Soul (Rhino)

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Aretha Franklin


251
Sugarhill Gang, 'Rapper's Delight'
Writers: S. Robinson, H. Jackson, M. Wright, G. O’Brien
Producer: Sylvia Robinson
Released: Oct. '79, Sugar Hill
12 weeks; No. 36 

Master Gee, Wonder Mike and Big Bank Hank were a pure studio creation, a trio of unknown MCs recruited by Sugar Hill’s Sylvia Robinson to make rap’s first radio hit. Based on a sample of Chic’s "Good Times," the track — with raps about bad food instead of boasting — kept going hip-hop, hippity-to-the-hop for 15 minutes.

Appears on: Rappers Delight: The Best of Sugarhill Gang (Rhino)

250
Sly and the Family Stone, 'Hot Fun in the Summertime'
Writer: Sly Stone
Producer: Stone
Released: Aug. '69, Epic
16 weeks; No. 2

Summer was already under way when Stone handed in this heavenly soul ballad to Epic, which was wary of releasing a summer song in August – but it was a smash anyway. The single came out just before the Family Stone performed at Woodstock – they were the first band to sign up for the historic festival. Michael Jackson later bought the rights to the song.

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Epic)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Sly and the Family Stone


249
The Band, 'The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down'
Writer: Robbie Robertson
Producers: John Simon, the Band
Released: Sept. '69, Capitol
Non-single

Robertson, a Canadian, vividly depicted the Civil War-era South in this moving dirge. "I remember taking him to the library so he could research the history and geography," said Levon Helm, the Band's only American, whose gritty vocal evoked the interior struggle of someone trying to make sense of a lost cause – like, in 1969, the war in Vietnam.

Appears on: The Band (Capitol)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Bands’ The Band


248
Jackie Wilson, '(Your Love Keeps Lifting Me) Higher and Higher'
Writers: Gary Jackson, Raynard Miner, Carl Smith
Producer: Carl Davis
Released: Aug. '67, Brunswick
12 weeks; No. 6

At first, he sang it like a ballad. But Wilson hit the right gallop after producer Davis told him "to jump and go along with the percussion." Motown bassist James Jamerson played down below, along with several other moonlighting members of the Funk Brothers band.

Appears on: The Very Best of Jackie Wilson (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jackie Wilson

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Jackie Wilson


247
The Spencer Davis Group, 'Gimme Some Lovin''
Writers: Davis, Steve Winwood, Muff Winwood
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: Dec. '66, United Artists
13 weeks; No. 7

Teenage singer Steve Winwood provided the impossibly raw vocals. "Steve had been singing, 'Gimme some lovin',' just yelling anything," said bassist-brother Muff. "It took about an hour to write, then down the pub for lunch."

Appears on: Gimme Some Lovin' (Sundazed)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Steve Winwood


246
The B-52's, 'Love Shack'
Writers: Kate Pierson, Fred Schneider, Keith Strickland, Cindy Wilson
Producers: Don Was, Nile Rodgers
Released: June '89, Reprise
27 weeks; No. 3

The B-52's had few reasons to party in 1989: Guitarist Ricky Wilson had died; their previous album had flopped. But with production by dance-rock master Don Was, they slapped smiles and Dixie New Wave glitter all over this bouncing beauty.

Appears on: Cosmic Thing (Reprise)


245
Elton John, 'Rocket Man'
Writers: John, Bernie Taupin
Producer: Gus Dudgeon
Released: May '72, Uni
15 weeks; No. 6

A perfect song for the age of moonwalks, this star trek was the elegiac tale of an astronaut lost in space, light-years from home. Taupin wrote it on the way to visiting his own family. "I got inside," he said, "and had to rush to write it all down before I'd forgotten it." Taupin was accused of ripping off Bowie's "Space Oddity," but he was actually thinking of "Rocket Man," by acid-folkies Pearls Before Swine.

Appears on: Honky Chateau (Island)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elton John

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elton John


244
Sly and the Family Stone, 'Stand!'
Writer: Sly Stone
Producer: Stone
Released: April '69, Epic
8 weeks; No. 22

The title song from Stone's classic black-rock LP became a civil rights anthem. But when a test pressing got a muted reaction on San Francisco radio, Stone added the funky coda, played by what his A&R man Stephen Paley called "old-men horn players," since the Family was unavailable. "He wrote out parts for the horn players and even passed out W-4 forms," said Paley. "He was that together."

Appears on: Stand! (Sony)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Sly and the Family Stone’s Stand!


243
Dion, 'The Wanderer'
Writer: Ernie Maresca
Producer: Gene Schwartz
Released: Dec. '61, Laurie
18 weeks; No. 2

Dion DiMucci's trademark hit – originally the B side to a single called "The Majestic," until DJs began flipping the record over – was a swaggering shuffle about a real-life hard-ass who wore tattoos of his girlfriends' names on his arms. "You say to a chick, 'Stay away from that guy,'â€‰" Dion said in 1976, when "The Wanderer" was a Top 20 hit again in the U.K. "And she would say, 'What guy?' Chicks loved a rebel."

Appears on: Runaround Sue (Capitol)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Dion


242
Dusty Springfield, 'Son of a Preacher Man'
Writers: John Hurley, Ronnie Wilkins
Producer: Jerry Wexler
Released: Nov. '68, Atlantic
12 weeks; No. 10

Springfield was white and English but sang as if born with black American soul. In 1968, newly signed to Atlantic and under the tutelage of its star producer Wexler, she went to the mecca of Dixie R&B to record the gospel-tinged Dusty in Memphis. She ended up doing her vocals in New York, but no matter: Her deep, heated voice captured the carnal fire of the South

Appears on: Dusty in Memphis (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Dusty Springfield


241
Patsy Cline, 'I Fall to Pieces'
Writer: Hank Cochran
Producer: Owen Bradley
Released: Jan. '61, Decca
20 weeks; No. 12

Cline was reluctant to record this ballad, which had been turned down by Brenda Lee, until Bradley coaxed her into it. Seven months pregnant when she cut it, Cline belted the ending the first time through, but the magic happened when she dropped to her lower register on her second try.

Appears on: 12 Greatest Hits (MCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Patsy Cline


240
Afrika Bambaataa and the Soul Sonic Force, 'Planet Rock'
Writers: Bambaataa, John Robie, the Soul Sonic Force
Producers: Bambaataa, Arthur Baker
Released: July '82, Tommy Boy
11 weeks; No. 48

"Can you play stuff like Kraftwerk?" asked Bam, who played their records at DJ gigs. Baker worried about stealing the melody from "Trans-Europe Express," but Robie said, "I'll tear that shit up."

Appears on: Looking for the Perfect Beat 1980-1985 (Tommy Boy)


239
Ray Charles, 'I Got a Woman'
Writers: Charles, Renald Richard
Producer: Jerry Wexler
Released: Nov. '54, ABC-Parliament
Predates chart

Charles was riding through Indiana one night in 1954 with his musical director Richard when they began singing along to a gospel tune on the radio. "Ray sang something like, 'I got a woman,'" said Richard. "I answered, 'Yeah, she lives across town.'" He finished the song the next day, and Charles cut it at an Atlanta radio station – a session now recognized as the birth of soul.

Appears on: Atlantic Singles (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Ray Charles

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Ray Charles


238
Buddy Holly and the Crickets, 'Everyday'
Writers: Charles Hardin, Norman Petty
Producer: Petty
Released: Sept. '57, Coral a
Did not chart

The flip side to "Peggy Sue," "Everyday" features the celesta, a keyboard with a glockenspiel-like tone that Petty kept in his New Mexico studio. The percussion is drummer Jerry Allison keeping time by slapping his knees. For legal reasons, Holly changed his songwriting credit to Charles Hardin, his real first and middle names.

Appears on: Best of Buddy Holly (Universal)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Buddy Holly

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Buddy Holly


237
The Byrds, 'I'll Feel a Whole Lot Better'
Writer: Gene Clark
Producer: Terry Melcher
Released: June '65, Columbia
Did not chart

The Byrds championed the songs of Bob Dylan, who in turn praised the exotic balladry of Byrd Gene Clark. "I remember him saying, 'Gene is really interesting to me,'" said bassist Chris Hillman. Clark wrote this about a girlfriend from their days at the L.A. club Ciro's. "She was a funny girl, and she started bothering me," he said. "I wrote the whole song within a few minutes."

Appears on: Mr. Tambourine Man (Columbia)


236
M.I.A., 'Paper Planes'
Writers: M.I.A., Diplo
Producers: Diplo, Switch
Released: August '07, Interscope
21 weeks; No. 4

Maya Arulpragasam cheerfully threatens to steal your money, over a sample of the Clash's "Straight to Hell." The unlikely hit took off thanks to its inclusion in the Pineapple Express trailer. "The other songs on the chart were Katy Perry and the Jonas Brothers," says M.I.A. "Then you saw 'Paper Planes' and it's cool because there's hope: 'Thank God the future's here.'"

Appears on: Kala (Interscope)


235
The Animals, 'We Gotta Get Out of This Place'
Writers: Barry Mann, Cynthia Weil
Producer: Mickie Most
Released: Aug. ’65, MGM
11 weeks; No. 13

Born in the Brill Building song factory and originally intended for the Righteous Brothers, it got a harsh white-blues treatment from the Animals. As singer Eric Burdon put it, “Whatever suited our attitude, we just bent to our own shape.” Its desperate intensity made the song a huge hit with U.S. soldiers in Vietnam and, a generation later, coalition forces in Iraq.

Appears on: Retrospective (ABKCO)


234
Roy Orbison, 'Only the Lonely'
Writers: Joe Melson, Orbison
Producer: Fred Foster
Released: May '60, Monument
21 weeks; No. 2

Orbison intended to offer this song to either Elvis Presley (also a Sun Records alumnus) or the Everly Brothers, who had cut the Orbison song "Claudette." But Orbison's falsetto made the loneliness real. "For a baritone to sing as high as I do," he said, "is ridiculous."

Appears on: For the Lonely: 18 Greatest Hits (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Roy Orbison

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Roy Orbison


233
Marvin Gaye, 'Sexual Healing'
Writers: Gaye, Odell Brown, David Ritz
Producer: Gaye
Released: Oct. '82, Columbia
21 weeks; No. 3

In April 1982 Gaye was living in exile in Brussels and suffering writer's block. "I suggested that Marvin needed sexual healing," Ritz, his biographer, later wrote. Gaye put the idea to a reggae-style beat by sideman Brown. The result: Gaye's last Top Five hit.

Appears on: Midnight Love (Columbia)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Marvin Gaye

• 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Marvin Gaye


232
Bob Dylan, 'Just Like a Woman'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Bob Johnston
Released: May '66, Columbia
6 weeks; No. 33

Dylan wrote this on Thanksgiving Day 1965 – three days after marrying Sara Lowndes – while on tour in Kansas City. His nonstop creative rush was taking a big toll. "I don't consider myself outside of anything," he said at the time. "I just consider myself not around." He turned his torment into this song, allegedly inspired by his recently ended affair with doomed Andy Warhol starlet Edie Sedgwick.

Appears on: Blonde on Blonde (Columbia)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan


231
Van Morrison, 'Moondance'
Writer: Morrison
Producer: Morrison
Released: Feb. '70, Warner Bros.
4 weeks; No. 92

The title song of Morrison's first self-produced album started "as a saxophone solo," he said. "I used to play this sax number over and over, anytime I picked up my horn." He played the sax solo on this recording, which combined the bucolic charm of his life in Woodstock, New York ("the cover of October skies"), with his love of the sophisticated jazz and R&B of Mose Allison and Ray Charles.

Appears on: Moondance (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Van Morrison

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Van Morrison


230
Muddy Waters, 'Mannish Boy'
Writers: McKinley Morganfield, Mel London, Ellas McDaniel
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess, Willie Dixon
Released: May '55, Chess
Did not chart

After Waters heard Bo Diddley audition "I'm a Man" for Chess, he replied with "Mannish Boy." (Diddley got a credit as McDaniel, his real name.) Both songs were issued in 1955 and shot into the R&B Top 10. "When I heard him, I realized the connection between all the music I heard," Keith Richards said of Waters. "He was like the code book."

Appears on: The Anthology (MCA/Chess)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Muddy Waters

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Muddy Waters

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Muddy Waters’ The Anthology


229
Chic, 'Good Times'
Writers: Nile Rodgers, Bernard Edwards
Producers: Rodgers, Edwards
Released: June '79, Atlantic
19 weeks; No. 1

The tone was half-ironic when Chic released "Good Times," a hedonistic roller-disco tune, during the Seventies recession. The other half was pure joy, and Edwards' bass line – bouncing on one note, then climbing – proved too snappy for just one song. Queen borrowed it for "Another One Bites the Dust"; in the South Bronx, the Sugarhill Gang put it under "Rapper's Delight."

Appears on: Risqué (Atlantic)


228
The Clash, 'Should I Stay or Should I Go'
Writers: The Clash
Producer: Glyn Johns
Released: May '82, Epic
13 weeks; No. 45

"My main influences," Mick Jones said, "are Mott the Hoople, the Kinks and the Stones" – which explains this choppy riff. Jones yells "Split!" because Joe Strummer snuck up behind him while he was recording his vocals. The chorus hints at the band's end: At the time, "none of us were really talking to each other," said Paul Simonon. The original four were soon no more.

Appears on: Combat Rock (Sony)


227
James Taylor, 'Fire and Rain'
Writer: Taylor
Producer: Peter Asher
Released: Feb. '70, Warner Bros.
16 weeks; No. 3

Taylor wrote the three verses of this song in three phases following the breakup of his band the Flying Machine. The first came in a London flat while he was signed to the Apple label, the second in a New York hospital as he kicked heroin and the third during a stay in a Massachusetts psychiatric facility. "It's like three samplings of what I went through," he said.

Appears on: Sweet Baby James (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: James Taylor

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: James Taylor


226
Muddy Waters, 'Hoochie Coochie Man'
Writer: Willie Dixon
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess, Dixon
Released: Jan. '54, Chess
Did not chart

Waters tested this out at the Chicago blues club Zanzibar. Dixon gave him some advice: "Well, just get a little rhythm pattern," he said. "Do the same thing over again, y'know." Waters cut it a couple of weeks later, with Dixon on bass.

Appears on: The Anthology (Chess/MCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Muddy Waters

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Muddy Waters

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Muddy Waters’ The Anthology


225
Sly and the Family Stone, 'Dance to the Music'
Writer: Sylvester Stewart (Sly Stone)
Producer: Stone
Released: Jan. '68, Epic
15 weeks; No. 8

Saxman Jerry Martini claims Stone did this song just to satisfy CBS executives' desire for a hit. "He hated it," Martini said. "It was so unhip to us. The beats were glorified Motown beats." But "Dance" fit Stone's vision for the band: "I wanted everyone to get a chance to sweat."

Appears on: Dance to the Music (Sony)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Sly and the Family Stone


224
Roy Orbison, 'Oh, Pretty Woman'
Writers: Orbison, Billy Dees
Producer: Wesley Rose
Released: Aug. '64, Monument
15 weeks; No. 1

Orbison told Dees to "get started writing by playing anything that comes to mind….My wife came in and wanted to go to town to get something." Orbison asked if she needed money. Dees then cracked, "Pretty woman never needs any money." The rest was easy.

Appears on: For the Lonely: 18 Greatest Hits (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Roy Orbison

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Roy Orbison


223
Lou Reed, 'Walk on the Wild Side'
Writer: Reed
Producers: David Bowie, Mick Ronson, Reed
Released: Dec. '72, RCA
14 weeks; No. 16

Reed was asked to write songs for a musical based on the novel A Walk on the Wild Side. The show fizzled, but Reed kept the title. "I thought it would be fun to introduce people you see at parties but don't dare approach," he said.

Appears on: Transformer (RCA)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Lou Reed

•100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Lou Reed


222
The Left Banke, 'Walk Away Renee'
Writers: Michael Brown, Bob Calilli, Tony Sansone
Producer: Harry Lookofsky
Released: Sept. '66, Smash
13 weeks; No. 5

In 1965, Brown was a 16-year-old keyboard prodigy with a crush on a bandmate's girlfriend – bassist Tom Finn had introduced Renee Fladen to the group. Brown wrote three songs about her, including "Walk Away Renee." He quit the Left Banke before they finished recording "Renee" but returned after the song became a hit a year later.

Appears on: There's Gonna Be a Storm (Mercury)


221
Howlin' Wolf, 'Spoonful'
Writer: Willie Dixon
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess
Released: June '60, Chess
Did not chart

Chess do-it-all Dixon wrote "Spoonful" for Howlin' Wolf in 1960. "It doesn't take a large quantity of anything to be good," explained Dixon. The Wolf, however, did not cheat on the heavy manners when he devoured the song in the studio with his mad-animal growl. What's more, he often performed the song – later covered by Cream – waving a large cooking spoon in front of his genitalia.

Appears on: Anniversary Collection (Chess)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Howlin’ Wolf

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Howlin’ Wolf


220
John Lee Hooker, 'Boom Boom'
Writer: Hooker
Producer: Calvin Carter
Released: Feb. '62, Vee-Jay
10 weeks; No. 60

Keith Richards said of Hooker, "Even Muddy Waters was sophisticated next to him." That was a compliment. With his gruff voice, the Hook put boogie to the blues, inspiring a generation of British blues acts, including the Animals, who covered this song to great effect. "Boom-boom," by the way, came from an affectionate greeting offered to Hooker by a female bartender in Detroit.

Appears on: The Very Best of John Lee Hooker (Rhino)


219
Dolly Parton, 'Jolene'
Writer: Parton
Producer: Bob Ferguson
Released: Jan. '74, RCA
8 weeks; No. 60

When Parton recorded "Jolene" in 1974, she was chiefly known as Porter Wagoner's TV partner, although she had written the hit "Coat of Many Colors." "Jolene" showed how she could put her stamp on traditional country, buffing an old-time-y groove and belting a tale of romantic rivalry. It became a Number One country single and has been covered with extra menace by the White Stripes.

Appears on: Jolene (Buddha/BMG)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Dolly Parton


218
The Lovin' Spoonful, 'Do You Believe in Magic'
Writer: John Sebastian
Producer: Erik Jacobsen
Released: July '65, Kama Sutra
13 weeks; No. 9

The first single by the Lovin' Spoonful went Top 10 and, in a sense, never went away. While rehearsing the song, Sebastian affixed a contact mike to his autoharp, and in combination with Zal Yanovsky's electric guitar, they hit on a unique sound. Sebastian said "Magic" was rooted in "the chord progressions coming out of Motown at the time."

Appears on: Do You Believe in Magic (Buddha)


217
Hank Williams, 'Your Cheatin' Heart'
Writers: Williams, Fred Rose
Producer: Rose
Released: Jan. '53, MGM
Predates pop charts

Legend has it that this song came to Williams when he was thinking about his first wife while driving around with his second; she wrote down the lyrics for him in the passenger seat. After polishing it with Rose, Williams recorded "Your Cheatin' Heart" during the last sessions he ever did, on September 23rd, 1952. He told a friend, "It's the best heart song I ever wrote."

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Mercury Nashville)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Hank Williams

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Hank Williams


216
Neil Young, 'Rockin' in the Free World'
Writer: Young
Producers: Niko Bolas, Young
Released: Oct. '89, Reprise
Non-single

"Don't feel like Satan/But I am to them," Young spat in this raucously ambivalent song about the pride and guilt of being an American. It was inspired by a remark from a member of Crazy Horse, who said gigs were safer in Europe than in the Middle East: "It's better to keep rockin' in the free world." "It was such a cliché," Young said. "I knew I had to use it."

Appears on: Freedom (Reprise)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Neil Young

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Neil Young


215
Prince, '1999'
Writer: Prince
Producer: Prince
Released: Oct. '82, Warner Bros.
27 weeks; No. 12

When Prince recorded 1999, he would go all day and all night without rest and turn down food since he felt eating would make him sleepy. The opening verse was originally recorded in three-part harmony; Prince split up the vocals, and the harmony parts became a new, odd melody. The single's first release didn't make the Top 40, but Prince put it out again after "Little Red Corvette," and it was finally a hit.

Appears on: 1999 (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Prince

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Prince


214
The Beach Boys, 'Caroline, No'
Writers: Brian Wilson, Tony Asher
Producer: Wilson
Released: March '66, Capitol
7 weeks; No. 32

Wilson ditched the other Beach Boys and used studio pros like "Be My Baby" drummer Hal Blaine on what was initially released as Brian's first solo single. It was largely the result of a misheard lyric. Wilson told Asher about a girl he'd liked in high school named Carol, and Asher responded with "Oh, Carol, I know." But Wilson heard it as "Caroline, no" and dashed off the rest of the song while stoned.

Appears on: Pet Sounds (Capitol)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beach Boys


213
? and the Mysterians, '96 Tears'
Writer: Rudy Martinez
Producer: Martinez
Released: Sept. '66, Pa-Go-Go
15 weeks; No. 1

The band, all Mexican-Americans living in Michigan, cut "96 Tears" in their manager's living room, and ? promoted the single throughout the state, all without ever revealing his real name (Rudy Martinez) or removing his sunglasses. That organ figure put the Farfisa company on the map (? later claimed they had used a Vox). The original has never been released on CD; all the CD versions are rerecordings.

Appears on: More Action (Cavestomp)


212
The Beach Boys, 'In My Room'
Writers: Brian Wilson, Gary Usher
Producer: Wilson
Released: Sept. '63, Capitol
11 weeks; No. 23

"Brian was always saying that his room was his whole world," said Usher, who wrote the lyrics based on Wilson's idea. The three-part harmony on the first verse that Wilson sang with his brothers Carl and Dennis recalled the vocal bits that Brian taught them when they shared a childhood bedroom. As the Beatles had done with some hits, the Boys cut a version in German.

Appears on: Surfer Girl/Shut Down, Volume 2 (Capitol)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beach Boys


211
Them, 'Gloria'
Writer: Van Morrison
Producer: Tommy Scott
Released: March '65, Parrot

1 week; No. 95

When Morrison wrote his first hit, "Gloria," he was just another hungry young rocker, with the Belfast garage band Them. "I was just being me, a street cat from Belfast," Morrison said. "Probably like thousands of kids from Belfast who were in bands." A Chicago group called Shadows of Knight hit with a more cautious version in 1966; Morrison later complained that "Gloria" was "capitalized on a lot."

Appears on: The Story of Them (Polydor)


210
The Everly Brothers, 'Bye Bye Love'
Writers: Boudleaux and Felice Bryant
Producer: Archie Bleyer
Released: May '57, Cadence
27 weeks; No. 2

 "Bye Bye Love" had been turned down by 30 artists before Bleyer offered it to the Everlys for their first single. Phil and Don took it happily, if for no other reason than the $64 they would each earn for making it. The guitar intro was borrowed from a song Don had written called "Give Me a Future."

Appears on: All-Time Original Hits (Rhino)


209
The Four Tops, 'Reach Out, I'll Be There'
Writers: Eddie Holland, Lamont Dozier, Brian Holland
Producers: Holland, Dozier, Holland
Released: Aug. '66, Motown
15 weeks; No. 1

 HDH pumped out Tops hits at a breakneck pace. "They were over so fast I can't remember them at all," said Dozier. Phil Spector called "Reach Out, I'll Be There," their second Number One, "black Dylan."

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)


208
Bill Withers, 'Lean on Me'
Writer: Withers
Producer: Withers
Released: June '72, Sussex
19 weeks; No. 1

Growing up as one of six kids in the coal-mining town of Slab Fork, West Virginia, Withers learned a lot about helping family and neighbors when they needed you. After a dislocating move to L.A., the bonds he built with co-workers manufacturing airplane toilets reminded him of the tightknit community he'd left back home, providing the inspiration for the plain-spoken "Lean on Me," his biggest hit.

Appears on: Lean on Me (Sony)


207
Otis Redding, 'Try a Little Tenderness'
Writers: Jimmy Campbell, Reginald Connelly, Harry Woods
Producers: Steve Cropper, Jim Stewart
Released: Dec. '66, Stax
10 weeks; No. 25

On his own, drummer Al Jackson Jr. switched to double-time on the second verse, for the high-energy climax. "We didn't know he was gonna do that," said bassist Duck Dunn. "It was amazing."

Appears on: Very Best of Otis Redding (Rhino)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Otis Redding


206
Bob Dylan, 'Positively 4th Street'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Bob Johnston
Released: Sept. '65, Columbia
9 weeks; No. 7

In whose direction did Dylan aim this? Most likely, "4th Street," the follow-up to "Like a Rolling Stone," is about the people he met in Greenwich Village (when he lived on West 4th) and on fraternity row at the University of Minnesota (on 4th Street in Minneapolis).

Appears on: The Essential Bob Dylan (Sony)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan


205
The Beatles, 'Come Together'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Sept. '69, Apple
16 weeks; No. 1

Timothy Leary was running for governor of California and asked Lennon to write a campaign song for him. The tune was not politically useful, so Lennon brought it to the Abbey Road sessions. "I said, 'Let's slow it down with a swampy bass-and-drums vibe,'" said McCartney. "I came up with a bass line, and it all flowed from there." It was the last song all four Beatles cut together.

Appears on: Abbey Road (Apple)


204
New Order, 'Bizarre Love Triangle'
Writers: Bernard Albrecht, Gillian Gilbert, Peter Hook, Stephen Morris
Producers: New Order
Released: Oct. '86, Qwest
2 weeks; No. 98

After the death of Joy Division's Ian Curtis, his band became New Order. "There's life, and there's death," drummer Morris said in 1983. "We were still alive, so we thought we'd carry on doing it." New Order wrote their synth-pop hits in a Manchester rehearsal room next to a cemetery. Said Morris, "Fate writes the lyrics, and we do the rest."

Appears on: Substance (Qwest)

RELATED:

•500 Greatest Albums of All Time: New Order's Substance


203
Beck, 'Loser'
Writer: Beck Hansen
Producer: Karl Stephenson
Released: 1993, Bong Load   
24 weeks; No. 10

In 1992, 22-year-old Beck Hansen was scraping by as a video-store clerk while performing bizarro folk songs at L.A. coffeehouses. After friends offered to record some songs, Beck cut "Loser" in his producer's kitchen. It became the centerpiece of an album (1994's Mellow Gold) that cost $200 to make.

Appears on: Mellow Gold (Geffen)


202
Parliament, 'Flash Light'
Writers: George Clinton, Bernie Worrell, Bootsy Collins
Producer: Clinton
Released: Dec. '77, Casablanca
16 weeks; No. 16

"Flash Light" is the P-Funk Nation's groove manifesto. "We're going to get the message out," Clinton declared in 1978. "We want to put the show on Broadway – tell the story straightforward so people understand that funk mean funk."

Appears on: Funkentelechy vs. the Placebo Syndrome (Mercury)

RELATED:

•100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Parliament and Funkedelic


201
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, 'Hey Joe'
Writer: William Roberts
Producer: Chas Chandler
Released: Dec. '66, Reprise
Did not chart

Thismurder ballad was the Experience's first single, recorded two weeks after their live debut. Hendrix was so shy about his voice that manager Chandler even hired a female vocal group, the Breakaways, for backup. The song had already been recorded by the Byrds, Love, the Standells and many other bands, but Hendrix learned it from folkie Tim Rose's version.

Appears on: Are You Experienced? (MCA)

200
Elvis Presley, 'Don't Be Cruel'
Writers: Otis Blackwell, Presley
Producer: Steve Sholes
Released: July '56, RCA
27 weeks; No. 1

Slapping the back of his guitar for extra percussion, Presley invented a new style for himself with his take on this song by blues singer Blackwell. "Don't Be Cruel," backed with "Hound Dog," was a double-sided smash on the pop, R&B and country charts. Its 11-week domination of the Number One spot was the longest in history – until "End of the Road," by Boyz II Men, broke that record in 1992.

Appears on: Elvis: 30 #1 Hits (RCA)


199
The Chantels, 'Maybe'
Writer: Arlene Smith
Producer: Richard Barrett
Released: Dec. '57, End
18 weeks; No. 15

At 16, Smith wrote and sang lead on this towering doo-wop song, a template for a generation of girl groups. The Chantels' second single, "Maybe," was recorded at a church in midtown Manhattan in October 1957, when the girls were all still in high school at St. Anthony of Padua in the Bronx. The single was first credited to label owner George Goldner, but now the world knows better.

Appears on: The Best of the Chantels (Rhino)


198
Guns n' Roses, 'Sweet Child O'Mine'
Writers: Guns n' Roses
Producer: Mike Clink
Released: Aug. '87, Geffen
24 weeks; No. 1

Axl Rose wrote this love letter to his girlfriend, Erin Everly (daughter of Don). Slash said he was just "fucking around with the intro riff, making a joke"; he didn't think much of it, but Rose knew better. Rose and Erin were later married – for all of one month.

Appears on: Appetite for Destruction (Geffen)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Guns n' Roses

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Guns n' Roses' Appetite for Destruction


197
Buddy Holly, 'Peggy Sue'
Writers: Jerry Allison, Holly, Norman Petty
Producer: Petty
Released: Sept. '57, Coral
22 weeks; No. 3

When the Crickets first played a new song called "Cindy Lou," Allison's snare drum was so loud that Petty told him to play in the studio's reception area. To placate his exiled drummer, Holly changed the title to "Peggy Sue," after Allison's girlfriend.

Appears on: Greatest Hits (MCA)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Buddy Holly

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Buddy Holly


196
The Drifters, 'There Goes My Baby'
Writers: Benjamin Nelson, Lover Patterson, George Treadwell
Producers: Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller
Released: May '59, Atlantic
19 weeks; No. 2

Leiber and Stoller wanted a striking sound to match new vocalist Ben E. King's majestic voice. The odd arrangement featured out-of-tune timpani and strings that seemed to quote Tchaikovsky's "1812 Overture." "It sounded like a radio caught between two stations," wrote Atlantic's Jerry Wexler. But King's croon soared above it all.

Appears on: The Very Best of the Drifters (Rhino)


195
Glen Campbell, 'Wichita Lineman'
Writer: Jimmy Webb
Producer: Al De Lory
Released: Nov. '68, Capitol
15 weeks; No. 3

Inspired by the isolation of a telephone-pole worker he saw on the Kansas-Oklahoma border, Webb wrote this in 1968 for Campbell, who had asked if Webb could come up with another "By the Time I Get to Phoenix." Campbell changed a guitar part and kept the keyboard from Webb's demo; the chiming sound at the fade, evoking telephone signals, was done on a massive church organ.

Appears on: Wichita Lineman (Capitol)


194
Amy Winehouse, 'Rehab'
Writer: Winehouse
Producer: Mark Ronson
Released: March '07, Universal Republic
20 weeks; No. 9

Drawing on Winehouse's real-life struggles, this cheeky, sonically perfect salvo made the London diva a worldwide star. The huge, Motown-inspired beat featured Brooklyn throwback R&B band the Dap-Kings. "One of the best recordings ever," said Roots drummer Ahmir "?uestlove" Thompson. "She's coming from Fifties and Sixties doo-wop, and they nailed that sound exactly."

Appears on: Back to Black (Universal Republic)

RELATED:

• Photos: The Tumultuous Life of Amy Winehouse


193
Lynyrd Skynyrd, 'Free Bird'
Writers: Allen Collins, Ronnie Van Zant
Producer: Al Kooper
Released: Sept. '73, MCA
12 weeks; No. 19

"What song is it you want to hear?" asks Van Zant on the definitive, 14-minute live version on One More From the Road. But audiences initially didn't want to hear "Free Bird" — dedicated to Duane Allman — until Collins added an uptempo section to the end of the ballad and the overlapping guitars started to boogie.

Appears on: One More From the Road (MCA)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Lynyrd Skynyrd

Bob Dylan, The Band, Madison Square Garden
Photo: Gijsbert Hanekroot/Redferns/Getty
192
Bob Dylan, 'Knockin' on Heaven's Door'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Gordon Carroll
Released: July '73, Columbia
16 weeks; No. 12

Three years had passed since his last studio album, and Dylan seemed at a loss. So he accepted an invitation to go to Mexico for Sam Peckinpah's Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid, for which he shot a bit part (in the role of "Alias") and did the soundtrack. For a death scene, Dylan delivered this tale of a dying sheriff, who wants only to lay his "guns in the ground."

Appears on: The Essential Bob Dylan (Sony)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan

• Bob Dylan at 70: His Best Songs, Classic Features, Photos and More


191
Bee Gees, 'Stayin' Alive'
Writers: Robin Gibb, Barry Gibb, Maurice Gibb
Producers: Barry Gibb, Robin Gibb, Maurice Gibb, Karl Richardson, Albhy Galuten
Released: Nov. '77, RSO
27 weeks; No. 1

This disco classic was written when Robert Stigwood approached the Bee Gees for music for a film based on the Brooklyn club scene. He needed a groove for an eight-minute John Travolta dance sequence. The Gibbs wrote the song on the staircase of a French chateau that served as the setting for several porn flicks. 

Appears on: Saturday Night Fever (Polydor)


190
AC/DC, 'Back in Black'
Writers: Angus Young, Malcolm Young, Brian Johnson
Producer: Mutt Lange
Released: July '80, Atlantic
15 weeks; No. 37

When frontman Bon Scott drank himself to death in 1980, AC/DC didn't retreat — they brought in a new singer, Brian Johnson. "Malcolm asked me if this riff he had was too funky," said Angus. "And I said, 'Well, if you're gonna discard it, give it to me!' "

Appears on: Back in Black (Sony)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: AC/DC


189
Aretha Franklin, 'I Never Loved a Man (the Way I Love You)'
Writer: Ronny Shannon
Producer: Jerry Wexler
Released: March '67, Atlantic
11 weeks; No. 9

Franklin went to Fame Studios to cut her soul-stirring take on Shannon's you done-me-wrong lament with the Muscle Shoals Rhythm Section – "Alabama white boys who took a left turn at the blues," as Wexler described them.

Appears on: I Never Loved a Man (the Way I Love You) (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Aretha Franklin


188
Creedence Clearwater Revival, 'Who'll Stop the Rain'
Writer: John Fogerty
Producer: Fogerty
Released: Jan. '70, Fantasy
Did not chart

Fogerty told Rolling Stone in 1970, "[Listeners] put too much weight on political references in songs. They think a song will save the world. It's absurd." Veiled allusions to FDR and Stalin in "Rain" suggest that politics was on his mind, but Fogerty insists he wanted to be symbolic, not specific to Vietnam, Woodstock or 1969. "As a result," he said, "the song is timeless."

Appears on: Cosmo's Factory (Fantasy)


187
Bob Dylan, 'Desolation Row'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Bob Johnston
Released: Aug. '65, Columbia
Non-single

In 1969, Dylan told Rolling Stone that he wrote this song in the back of a New York cab. Since it has 659 words and clocks in at more than 11 minutes, that's one long cab ride. Dylan scrapped an electric, full-band version of the song at the last minute, and rerecorded it on acoustic guitar. The final version was spliced together from two consecutive takes during the last sessions for Highway 61.

Appears on: Highway 61 Revisited (Columbia)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Bob Dylan's Highway 61 Revisited

• Bob Dylan at 70: His Best Songs, Classic Features, Photos and More


186
The Beatles, 'Please Please Me'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Feb. '64, Vee-Jay
13 weeks; No. 3

"It was my attempt at writing a Roy Orbison song," Lennon said of "Please Please Me." He originally penned a yearning ballad while listening to Orbison in a bedroom at his aunt's house, but Martin suggested it would sound better sped up. Said Lennon, "By the time the session came around, we were so happy with the result, we couldn't get it recorded fast enough."

Appears on: Please Please Me (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The Lost Beatles Photos: Rare Shots From 1964-1966


185
B.B. King, 'The Thrill is Gone'
Writers: Roy Hawkins, Rick Darnell
Producer: Bill Szymczyk
Released: Dec. '69, BluesWay
14 weeks; No. 15

"It was a different kind of blues ballad, and I carried it around in my head for years," King said of the song, which dated to 1951. The 44-year-old King's career reached its zenith with an inspired performance during a 1969 session in which, as King put it, "all the ideas came together."

Appears on: Greatest Hits (MCA)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: B.B. King

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: B.B. King


184
The Drifters, 'Save the Last Dance for Me'
Writers: Doc Pomus, Mort Shuman
Producers: Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller
Released: Sept. '60, Atlantic
18 weeks; No. 1

As Billy Joel said, before the Drifters, the last dance was the one nobody stuck around for. But this elegant R&B ballad made the end of the party sound like the essence of true romance. Lead vocalist Ben E. King later sang "Stand by Me."

Appears on: The Drifters' Golden Hits (Atlantic)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Drifters' Golden Hits


183
Booker T. and the MG's, 'Green Onions'
Writers: Booker T. Jones, Steve Cropper, Lewis Steinberg, Al Jackson
Producer: Jim Stewart
Released: Oct. '62, Stax
16 weeks; No. 3

The Stax house band had never considered making its own hits until it cooked up this simmering jam in a half-hour before a jingle session. "I said, 'Shit, this is the best damn instrumental I've heard since I don't know when,' " guitarist Cropper recalled. As for the onions, he explained that "we were trying to think of something that was as funky as possible."

Appears on: Green Onions (Atlantic)


182
OutKast, 'Hey Ya!'
Writer: André 3000
Producer: André 3000
Released: Sept. '03, LaFace
32 weeks; No. 1

Not a likely recipe for a hit: a rock song with a bizarre 11/4 time signature by half of a hip-hop duo. Dré played almost all the instruments on this irresistible party jam — he said that its guitar chords, the first he ever learned, were inspired by "the Ramones, the Buzzcocks, the Smiths." Fun fact: The "ladies" who cheer halfway in are one lone woman, engineer Rabeka Tuinei.

Appears on: Speakerboxxx/The Love Below (LaFace/Arista)


181
Joy Division, 'Love Will Tear Us Apart'
Writers: Ian Curtis, Peter Hook, Stephen Morris, Bernard Sumner
Producers: Martin Hannett
Released: April '80, Enigma
Did not chart

Singer Ian Curtis did not live to see this Manchester, England, band's best single become a hit. He committed suicide in May 1980, two days before a scheduled American tour. "Ian's influence seemed to be madness and insanity," said guitarist Bernard Sumner. After Curtis' death, Joy Division carried on under the name New Order.

Appears on: Substance 1977-1980 (Qwest)


180
Big Star, 'September Gurls'
Writer: Alex Chilton
Producers: Big Star
Released: May '74, Ardent
Did not chart

Big Star were totally unfashionable in their day – early-Seventies Memphis rockers inspired by Sixties British Invasion pop. A nonhit from the band's second LP, Radio City, "September Gurls" is now revered as a power-pop classic. "They were fairly dark records wrapped in a pop package," drummer Jody Stephens said of Big Star's now-adored catalog. "Maybe that's what's made them enduring."

Appears on: Radio City (Stax)


179
Tom Petty, 'Free Fallin''
Writers: Petty, Jeff Lynne
Producer: Lynne
Released: June '89, MCA
21 weeks; No. 7

Petty and Lynne wrote and recorded "Free Fallin' " in just two days, the first song completed for Petty's solo LP Full Moon Fever. The label initially rejected the album because of a lack of hits. "So I waited six months and brought the same record back," Petty said. "And they loved it."

Appears on: Full Moon Fever (MCA)


178
The Beach Boys, 'Don't Worry Baby'
Writers: Brian Wilson, Roger Christian
Producer: Wilson
Released: May '64, Capitol
10 weeks; No. 24

Wilson, who listened to the Ronettes' "Be My Baby" so much he wore out the grooves, wrote "Don't Worry Baby" for Ronnie Bennett. From the opening drum riff, "Don't Worry Baby" is sheer homage but also vintage Beach Boys, with one of Wilson's finest falsetto-laden vocals.

Appears on: Sounds of Summer (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beach Boys


177
The Bobby Fuller Four, 'I Fought the Law'
Writers: Sonny Curtis, Fuller
Producer: Bob Keane
Released: Feb. '66, Mustang
11 weeks; No. 9

Singing in his Texas drawl, Fuller seemed to channel his idol, Buddy Holly, on this tune penned by the Crickets' Curtis. "I Fought the Law" was a bracing hybrid of outlaw romanticism, garage rock, surf music, Wall of Sound and British Invasion energy. Keane created the track's rich reverb by using the vault of a bank next door to the L.A. studio as an echo chamber.

Appears on: I Fought the Law: The Best of the Bobby Fuller Four (Rhino)


176
The Rolling Stones, 'Paint it Black'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Andrew Loog Oldham
Released: May '66, London
11 weeks; No. 1

Brian Jones plucked the haunting sitar melody at the 1966 L.A. session for this classic. Bill Wyman added klezmer-flavored organ; studio legend Jack Nitzsche played the gypsy-style piano. "Brian had pretty much given up on the guitar by then," said Richards. "If there was [another] instrument around, he had to be able to get something out of it. It gave the Stones on record a lot of different textures." 

Appears on: Aftermath (ABKCO)

RELATED:

• Photos: Rare and Intimate Pictures of the Rolling Stones


175
The Sex Pistols, 'God Save the Queen'
Writers: Johnny Rotten, Steve Jones, Glen Matlock, Paul Cook
Producer: Chris Thomas
Released: May '77, Warner Bros.
Did not chart 

Banned by the BBC for "gross bad taste," this blast of nihilism savaged the pomp of Queen Elizabeth II's silver jubilee and came in a sleeve showing Her Majesty with a safety pin through her lip. "As far as I'm concerned, she ain't no human being," sneered singer Rotten. "She's a piece of cardboard they drag around on a trolley."

Appears on: Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols (Warner Bros.)


174
Abba, 'Dancing Queen'
Writers: Benny Andersson, Björn Ulvaeus, Stig Anderson
Producers: Andersson, Ulvaeus
Released: Nov. '76, Atlantic
22 weeks; No. 1

When Benny Andersson auditioned the song for his fiancee and band member Anni-Frid Lyngstad, she was moved to tears. Sweden's biggest musical export debuted "Queen" in 1976 at a ball for King Carl Gustaf on the eve of his wedding. The song, a disco-flavored dessert of sublime melody and pop-operatic harmonies, became the group's only U.S. Number One.

Appears on: Arrival (Polydor)


173
Aerosmith, 'Dream On'
Writer: Steven Tyler
Producer: Arian Barber
Released: June '73, Columbia
9 weeks; No. 59

Tyler began writing this power ballad in his late teens. He was still at it in Aerosmith's early days, pounding a piano in the basement of the group's living quarters. "Dream On" was a huge regional hit in Boston when it was first released in 1973 but never made the national Top 40. An edited version finally reached the Top 10 in 1976, giving the band its breakthrough hit.

Appears on: Aerosmith (Columbia)

RELATED:

• Aerosmith Live: Four Decades of Rockin' the Joint


172
Jay-Z, '99 Problems'
Writers: Jay-Z, Rick Rubin
Producer: Rubin
Released: Nov. '03, Roc-a-Fella
12 weeks; No. 30

Jigga's decade-long run reached its crescendo with this Black Album smash. Mixing an old Ice-T hook with an intense, clanging groove – including samples spliced in from Billy Squier's "The Big Beat" and Mountain's "Long Red" – it was the funkiest thing Rubin had touched since Licensed to Ill. Def Jam label head Lyor Cohen had suggested the collaboration. "I knew I was gonna get fresh shit," he said.

Appears on: The Black Album (Roc-a-Fella)


171
Joni Mitchell, 'Both Sides Now'
Writer: Mitchell
Producer: Mitchell
Released: May '69, Reprise
Did not chart

As her first marriage fell apart in the late Sixties, Mitchell saw her career bloom with hit covers of her work by singers such as Tom Rush and Judy Collins, including the latter's Top 10 version of "Both Sides Now." Mitchell sang it herself on the 1969 LP Clouds, describing the song as "a meditation on reality and fantasy. . . . The idea was so big it seemed like I'd just scratched the surface of it."

Appears on: Clouds (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Joni Mitchell

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Joni Mitchell


170
R.E.M., 'Losing My Religion'
Writers: Berry, Buck, Mills, Stipe
Producers: Scott Lift, R.E.M.
Released: March '91, Warner Bros.
21 weeks; No. 4

"Losing My Religion" is built around acoustic guitar and mandolin, not exactly a familiar sound on pop radio in the early Nineties – singer Michael Stipe called it a "freak hit." As for the subject matter, it's not religion: "I wanted to write a classic obsession song," he said. "So I did."

Appears on: Out of Time (Warner Bros.)


169
The Temptations, 'Papa Was a Rollin' Stone'
Writers: Norman Whitfield, Barrett Strong
Producer: Whitfield
Released: Oct. '72, Gordy
16 weeks; No. 1

At first the Temptations hated this song, especially Dennis Edwards: His father had died on September 3rd, just like the papa in the song. Then "Papa" topped the charts, and it "kind of grew on us," said Temptation Otis Williams.

Appears on: Anthology (Motown)


168
Marvin Gaye, 'Let's Get It On'
Writers: Gaye, Ed Townsend
Producers: Gaye, Townsend
Released: June '73, Tamla
14 weeks; No. 1

After 1971's "What's Going On," Gaye radically changed course with this ode to sexual bliss. With the help of producer and songwriter Townsend, Gaye created a masterpiece of erotic persuasion that topped the pop and R&B charts. Gaye said later that he hoped "Let's Get It On" didn't "advocate promiscuity" but also said he had a hunch the song might have "some aphrodisiac power."

Appears on: Let's Get It On (Motown)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Marvin Gaye

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Marvin Gaye


167
Tracy Chapman, 'Fast Car'
Writer: Chapman
Producer: David Kershenbaum
Released: April '88, Elektra
 21 weeks; No. 6

Tracy Chapman was a hardened veteran of Boston coffeehouse gigs (she once got a demo-tape rejection letter suggesting she tune her guitar) when a classmate at Tufts University told his music-publisher dad to check her out. Soon after, she made her 1988 debut, featuring this haunting rumination on escape. "Fast Car" won a Grammy, setting Chapman's career in motion.

Appears on: Tracy Chapman (Elektra)

RELATED:

• The 500 Best Albums of All Time: Tracy Chapman's Tracy Chapman


166
Queen, 'Bohemian Rhapsody'
Writer: Freddie Mercury
Producer: Roy Thomas Baker
Released: Nov. '75, Elektra
24 weeks; No. 9

According to Queen guitarist Brian May, everyone in the band was bewildered when Mercury brought them a draft of this four-part suite — even before he told them, "That's where the operatic bits come in!" Recording technology was so taxed by the song's multitracked scaramouches and fandangos that some tapes became virtually transparent from so many overdubs.

Appears on: A Night at the Opera (Hollywood)


165
Sinead O'Connor, 'Nothing Compares 2 U'
Writer: Prince
Producers: O'Connor, Nellee Hooper
Released: March '90, Ensign
21 weeks; No. 1

Originally recorded by one of Prince's flop side projects, the Family, the tune became the Number One song of 1990 in O'Connor's rendition. The video focused on her face for four minutes until she shed a lone tear. "I didn't intend for that moment to happen," O'Connor said, "but when it did, I thought, 'I should let this happen.' "

Appears on: I Do Not Want What I Haven't Got (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Sinead O'Connor's I Do Not Want What I Haven't Got


164
Ray Charles, 'I Can't Stop Loving You'
Writer: Don Gibson
Producer: Sid Feller
Released: May '62, ABC-Paramount
18 weeks; No. 1

When Charles put out Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music, DJs picked up on this remake of the Kitty Wells hit, which hadn't been released as a single. After Charles heard that white vocalist Tab Hunter had cut his own rendition of the song, ABC rushed out a 45-friendly two-and-a-half-minute version.

Appears on: Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Ray Charles' Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music


163
Johnny Cash, 'Folsom Prison Blues'
Writer: Cash
Producer: Sam Phillips
Released: Jan. '56, Sun
18 weeks; No. 32

Cash first recorded "Folsom Prison Blues," one of his earliest songs, for Sun in 1956. But it was the thrilling, electric '68 version, live at the prison, that defined his outlaw persona. Cash said he wrote the line "I shot a man in Reno/Just to watch him die," while "trying to think of the worst reason . . . for killing another person." He added, "It did come to mind quite easily, though."

Appears on: The Essential Johnny Cash (Columbia)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Johnny Cash

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Johnny Cash


162
Public Enemy, 'Bring the Noise'
Writers: Carlton Ridenhour, Eric Sadler, Hank Shocklee
Producers: Rick Rubin, Carl Ryder
Released: April '88, Def Jam
Did not chart

"We were the first rap group to really tempo it up," Chuck D said. Over the Bomb Squad's souped-up horn riffs from Marva Whitney's "It's My Thing," PE showed how far-reaching its sound and political ambitions were, name-checking everyone from Yoko Ono and Anthrax (who later remade the song with Chuck D) to Louis Farrakhan.

Appears on: It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back (Def Jam)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Public Enemy


161
The Velvet Underground, 'I'm Waiting for the Man'
Writer: Lou Reed
Producers: Andy Warhol, Tom Wilson
Released: March '67, Verve
Non-single

Originally a rootsy Dylan hommage, the song evolved into a proto-punk classic steeped in New York grit. The Velvets mixed R&B rhythm-guitar workout, blues-piano stomp and dreamy art drone, as Reed deadpans a story about scoring $26 worth of heroin in Harlem. "Everything about that song holds true," said Reed, "except the price."

Appears on: The Velvet Underground and Nico (Polygram)


160
U2, 'Moment of Surrender'
Writers: Bono, the Edge, Adam Clayton, Larry Mullen Jr.
Producers: Brian Eno, Daniel Lanois
Released: March '09, Interscope
Non-single

The most devastating U2 ballad since "One" sets lush, gospel-tinged music – much of it improvised live in the studio – against dark subject matter: It's about a junkie riding the subway. 

Appears on: No Line on the Horizon (Interscope)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: U2

• U2: The Rolling Stone Covers


159
Bill Haley and His Comets, '(We're Gonna) Rock Around the Clock'
Writers: Jimmy DeKnight, Max Freedman
Producer: Milt Gabler
Released: May '54, Decca
24 weeks; No. 1

Haley began his career as a country yodeler before converting to rock & roll. "Clock" was a modest hit until it played during the opening credits of The Blackboard Jungle and shot to Number One.

Appears on: The Best of Bill Haley and His Comets (MCA)


158
The Flamingos, 'I Only Have Eyes for You'
Writer: Harry Warren
Producer: George Goldner
Released: April '59, End
13 weeks; No. 11

Dubbed "The Sultans of Smooth," this Chicago quintet honed their harmonies singing in a black Jewish temple choir and scored its best-known song with "I Only Have Eyes for You," originally a hit for crooner Ben Selvin in 1934. The Flamingos take the song all the way to Venus with elegant vocalizations and the otherworldly doo-bop-sh-bop.

Appears on: The Best of the Flamingos (Rhino)


157
Simon and Garfunkel, 'The Sounds of Silence'
Writer: Paul Simon
Producer: Tom Wilson
Released: Nov. '65, Columbia 
14 weeks; No. 1

Simon wrote this as an acoustic ballad, but  Simon and Garfunkel's first single version died. While Simon was in England, Wilson, who was producing Bob Dylan's "Like a Rolling Stone," asked members of Dylan's studio band to add electric guitar and drums. Columbia released the amplified "Silence," which became a hit before Simon and Garfunkel had even heard it.

Appears on: Sounds of Silence (Columbia)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Simon and Garfunkel


156
Creedence Clearwater Revival, 'Proud Mary'
Writer: John Fogerty
Producer: Fogerty
Released: Jan. '69, Fantasy
14 weeks; No. 2

"It was, like, the first really good song I ever wrote," Fogerty said of "Proud Mary," which began a run of five consecutive Top Three singles for CCR. He wrote the song, later unforgettably covered by Ike and Tina Turner, after his Army discharge: "I was fooling with the chord changes and started singing about the river. I realized, 'Well, maybe if I make it about the boat.' "     

Appears on: Bayou Country (Fantasy)

 


155
Buddy Holly and the Crickets, 'Rave On'
Writers: Sonny West, Bill Tilghman, Norman Petty
Producer: Petty
Released: April '58, Coral
10 weeks; No. 37

West recorded his own version of "Rave On" at the New Mexico studio where Holly laid down most of his hits. Petty wanted to give it to another band, but Holly said, "No way. I've got to have this song." 

Appears on: Buddy Holly: Greatest Hits (MCA)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Buddy Holly

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Buddy Holly


154
The Beatles, 'A Hard Day's Night'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: July '64, Capitol
13 weeks; No. 1

The title comes from a Ringo Starr malapropism, the product of a marathon recording session. Lennon was fond of these Ringoisms and wrote the song overnight. Said Lennon, "The only reason [Paul] sang on it was because I couldn't reach the notes."

Appears on: A Hard Day's Night (Capitol)

RELATED:

•  The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles


153
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, 'Foxey Lady'
Writer: Hendrix
Producer: Chas Chandler
Released: Aug. '65, Reprise
4 weeks; No. 67

Heather Taylor, the future wife of the Who's Roger Daltrey, was said to have inspired this lip-smacking ode as Hendrix was gathering songs in London for his 1967 debut LP, Are You Experienced? Hendrix scrapes his pick down a guitar string, literally making it tremble with anticipation, before exploding into an indelibly dirty rift. "I'm comin' to getcha," he promises – and he did.

Appears on: Are You Experienced? (MCA)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix


152
The Penguins, 'Earth Angel'
Writers: Jesse Belvin, Curtis Williams
Producer: Dootsie Williams
Released: Dec. '54, Dootone
15 weeks; No. 8

Crudely recorded in a garage and released on a small label, "Earth Angel" turned out to be a pivotal record in the early development of rock & roll. The artless, unaffected vocals of the Penguins, four black high schoolers from L.A., defined the street-corner elegance of doo-wop. The Penguins' version also outsold a sanitized, big-label cover by schmaltzy white group the Crew-Cuts.

Appears on: Earth Angel (Ace)


151
The Byrds, 'Eight Miles High'
Writers: Gene Clark, Roger McGuinn, David Crosby
Producer: Allen Stanton
Released: April '66, Columbia
9 weeks; No. 14

A rare collaboration between three Byrds, it was supposedly about an airplane flight. McGuinn's 12-string solo was inspired by John Coltrane's sax playing and Rod Argent's piano on the Zombies' "She's Not There." "Of course it was a drug song," Crosby said. "We were stoned when we wrote it. But it was also about the [plane] trip to London."

Appears on: Fifth Dimension (Legacy)

150
The Everly Brothers, 'Cathy's Clown'
Writers: Phil and Don Everly
Producer: Wesley Rose
Released: April '60, Warner Bros. 
17 weeks; No. 1

After seven Top 10 hits for Cadence Records, the Everlys became the first artists signed to a new record label: Warner Bros. The fledgling company wooed the Kentuckians with a 10-year, $1 million contract. They cut eight songs as potential debut singles and rejected all of them before settling on "Cathy's Clown." The duo continued scoring hits until they enlisted in the Marines in 1962. 

Appears on: All-Time Original Hits (Rhino)


149
Iggy Pop, 'Lust for Life'
Writers: David Bowie, Pop
Producer: Bowie
Released: Sept. '77, RCA
Did not chart

With its enormous kaboom and Pop's sneering, free-associative lyrics (the line about "hypnotizing chickens" is a reference to William S. Burroughs' The Ticket That Exploded), "Lust for Life" is half a kiss-off to drugged-out hedonism, half a French kiss to it. The opening riff was supposedly taken from some Morse code Bowie heard on the Armed Forces Network. Nineteen years after the song first appeared, it was used in the 1996 movie Trainspotting, paving the way for cleaned-up versions to be used in TV ads for cars and cruise lines. And the line "Of course I've had it in the ear before"? "That's a common expression in the Midwest," Pop said. "To give it to him right in the ear means to fuck somebody over."

Appears on: Lust for Life (Virgin)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Iggy Pop

• Photos: The 2008 Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony


148
Janis Joplin, 'Me and Bobby McGee'
Writers: Kris Kristofferson, Fred Foster
Producer: Paul Rothchild
Released: Jan. '71, Columbia
15 weeks; No. 1

Joplin's only Number One hit was a posthumous one, and a country, not a blues, song. "Me and Bobby McGee" came from her drinking buddy and occasional crush Kris Kristofferson, who was inspired to write it after seeing Federico Fellini's 1954 film La Strada, Italian for "the road." (It had already been recorded by "King of the Road" singer Roger Miller.) Joplin's version was "just the tip of the iceberg, showing a whole untapped source of Texas, country and blues that she had at her fingertips," recalled pianist Richard Bell. It was a standout from Pearl, her last solo album, released less than a year after she died of a heroin overdose.

Appears on: Pearl (Sony/Legacy)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Janis Joplin

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Times: Janis Joplin


147
The B-52's, 'Rock Lobster'
Writers: Fred Schneider, Ricky Wilson
Producer: Chris Blackwell
Released: July '79, Warner Bros.
8 weeks; No. 56

A self-described "quirky little dance band," the B-52's invented New Wave weirdness with this slice of bouffant pop topped with Farfisa organ, Yoko Ono-ish vocals and Schneider's creepy speak-singing about a bizarro seaside scene. "I was at a disco that had pictures of lobsters and children playing ball," he said. " 'Rock Lobster' sounded like a good title for a song."

Appears on: The B-52's (Warner Bros.)


146
Sly and the Family Stone, 'Everyday People'
Writer: Sly Stone
Producer: Stone
Released: Nov. '68, Epic
19 weeks; No. 1

"Everyday People" appeared on Sly and the Family Stone's fourth LP, Stand!, which explored everything from hot funk to cool pop. Stone, a former DJ in San Francisco who also produced the hits "Laugh, Laugh" and "Just a Little" for the white pop group the Beau Brummels, seemed blind to the lines between musical genres. "I was into everyone's records," he said of his radio days. "I'd play Dylan, Hendrix, James Brown back to back, so I didn't get stuck in any one groove." As the song was going to Number One, Sly canceled three months of bookings, including a slot on The Ed Sullivan Show, when trumpeter Cynthia Robinson needed emergency gallbladder surgery. Hits were nice, but family came first.

Appears on: Stand! (Sony)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Sly and the Family Stone's Stand!

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Sly and the Family Stone


145
Ramones, 'I Wanna Be Sedated'
Writers: Ramones
Producer: Tommy Erdelyi, Ed Stasium
Released: Oct. '78, Sire
Did not chart

The greatest God-does-the-road-ever-suck song, "I Wanna Be Sedated" was written by Joey Ramone, who at the time was suffering from severe teakettle burns and was upset about having to fly to London for a gig. Plagued by obsessive-compulsive disorder and various other ailments, Joey always had a rough time touring. "Put me in a wheelchair/And get me to the show/Hurry, hurry, hurry/Before I go loco!" he rants. Johnny's guitar solo – the same note, 65 times in a row – is the ultimate expression of his anti-artifice philosophy; the bubblegum-pop key change that follows it, though, is pure Joey.

Appears on: Road to Ruin (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Ramones

• 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Johnny Ramone


144
Prince and the Revolution, 'Purple Rain'
Writer: Prince
Producer: Prince
Released: June '84, Warner Bros.
16 weeks; No. 2

Bobby Z of the Revolution recalled the first time he heard Prince play "Purple Rain": "It was almost country. It was almost rock. It was almost gospel." The basic tracks were recorded live at a 1983 club date in Minneapolis, benefiting the Minnesota Dance Theater. But the seeds came from Prince's 1999 tour; Bob Seger was touring at the same time, and Prince decided to try writing a song in the same anthemic vein.

Appears on: Purple Rain (Warner Bros.)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Prince

• 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Prince


143
James Brown and His Famous Flames, 'Please, Please, Please'
Writers: Brown, Johnny Terry
Producer: Ralph Bass
Released: Feb. '56, Federal
2 weeks; No. 95

On parole after three years in a Georgia juvenile pen, Brown hooked up with the Famous Flames for his debut single: a screaming burst of R&B. It had been in the Flames' act for two years before they put down a demo, which caught the ear of talent scout Bass. He signed the group to King/Federal Records, despite label head Syd Nathan's opinion that the song was "a piece of shit." Kicking off with Brown's shriek, the single drove women wild and became his set-closer, but the Flames, feeling upstaged, quit the act a year later.

Appears on: 50th Anniversary Collection (UTV/Polydor)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: James Brown

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: James Brown


142
The Everly Brothers, 'All I Have to Do Is Dream'
Writers: Boudleaux and Felice Bryant
Producer: Archie Bleyer
Released: May '58, Cadence
11 weeks; No. 21

Although Don Everly had a contract to work as a songwriter before he and his brother Phil began their hitmaking, their first three big singles were all written by the husband-and-wife songwriting team of Boudleaux and Felice Bryant. "I would go to them for lovelorn advice when I was young, and divorce advice when I was older," Phil said. "All I Have to Do Is Dream," with Chet Atkins' innovative tremolo chording backing the brothers' high-lonesome harmonies, went to Number One on not just the pop chart but the R&B chart as well.

Appears on: All-Time Original Hits (Rhino)


141
Led Zeppelin, 'Kashmir'
Writers: John Bonham, Jimmy Page, Robert Plant
Producer: Page
Released: March '75, Swan Song
Non-single

While vacationing in southern Morocco, Plant conjured the lyrics for Led Zeppelin's most ambitious experiment, the centerpiece of 1975's Physical Graffiti. As he traveled the desert in northwest Africa, Plant envisioned himself driving straight through to Kashmir, on the India-China border. Meanwhile, back in the band's studio in rural England, Page and Bonham began riffing on an Arabic-sounding set of chords that would perfectly match Plant's desert vision. "The song was bigger than me," said Plant. "I was petrified. I was virtually in tears." John Paul Jones' string arrangement provided the crowning touch, ratcheting up the song's grandeur to stadium-rock proportion.

Appears on: Physical Graffiti (Atlantic)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Led Zeppelin

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Robert Plant

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimmy Page


140
The Beatles, 'I Saw Her Standing There'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Jan. '64, Capitol
11 weeks; No. 14

"One, two three, fah!" The B side to the band's American breakthrough single, "I Want to Hold Your Hand," this song had been written by McCartney two years earlier. After penning the first line  - "She was just 17" – McCartney wanted to avoid completing the rhyme with "beauty queen." He and Lennon had "started to realize that we had to stop at these bad lines or we were only going to write bad songs," he said. "So we went through the alphabet: between, clean, lean, mean." With "you know what I mean," he was on his way.

Appears on: Please Please Me (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The Lost Beatles Photographs


139
Sly and the Family Stone, 'Family Affair'
Writer: Sly Stone
Producer: Stone
Released: Oct. '71, Epic
14 weeks; No. 1

When There's a Riot Goin' On came out in 1971, a Rolling Stone reporter mentioned the rumor that Stone had played all the instruments himself, and he asked Sly just how much he played. "I've forgotten, man," Stone said. "Whatever was left." The leadoff single, the aquatic funk number "Family Affair," was widely considered to be about his relationships with his band, family and the Black Panthers. "Well," Stone said, "they may be trying to tear me apart; I don't feel it. Song's not about that. Song's about a family affair, whether it's a result of genetic processes or a situation in the environment."

Appears on: There's a Riot Goin' On (Sony)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Sly Stone


138
The Beatles, 'Eleanor Rigby'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Aug. '66, Capitol
8 weeks; No. 11 

When McCartney first played the song for neighbor Donovan, the words were "Ola Na Tungee/Blowing his mind in the dark/With a pipe full of clay." McCartney fumbled around with the lyrics until he landed on the line "Picks up the rice in a church where a wedding has been." It was only then that he realized he was writing about the loneliness of old age. "Father McKenzie" was originally "Father McCartney"; Ringo chipped in the line "darning his socks in the night." The character sketch was fleshed out by the Beatles' vocals, but the backing music was the sole product of an eight-man string section, working from a George Martin score.

Appears on: Revolver (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beatles' Revolver

• The Lost Beatles Photos: Rare Shots from 1944 – 1966


137
Elton John, 'Your Song'
Writers: Bernie Taupin, John
Producer: Gus Dudgeon
Released: Nov. '70, Uni
14 weeks; No. 8 

Taupin has often claimed that a song should never take more than a half-hour to write. His first classic took all of 10 minutes. In 1969, Taupin and John were sharing a bunk bed at Elton's mom's house when Taupin wrote the words to "Your Song" one morning at the breakfast table. The soaring piano ballad would become the breakthrough single that introduced John to America. Although John insisted that the song was inspired by an old girlfriend of Taupin's, the lyricist maintains that it was aimed at no one in particular. "The early ones were not drawn from experience but imagination," Taupin said. " 'Your Song' could only have been written by a 17-year-old who'd never been laid in his life." 

Appears on: Greatest Hits (Island)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elton John

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elton John


136
The Beatles, 'While My Guitar Gently Weeps'
Writer: George Harrison
Producer: George Martin
Released: Nov. '68, Apple
Non-single 

One of Harrison's greatest songs was conceived during a visit to his parents' home. Having studied the Chinese fortune-telling book the I Ching, Harrison decided he should surrender to chance. "I picked up a book at random, opened it, saw 'gently weeps,' then laid the book down again and started the song," he said. Dissatisfied with the Beatles' recording of the song, he invited Eric Clapton to play the guitar solo. "It was good because that then made everyone act better," Harrison recalled. "Paul got on the piano and played a nice intro, and they all took it more seriously." Although Martin was the credited producer, the session tape box read "Produced by the Beatles."

Appears on: The Beatles (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The Top Ten Beatles Songs of All Time


135
Wilson Pickett, 'In the Midnight Hour'
Writers: Pickett, Steve Cropper
Producers: Jerry Wexler, Jim Stewart
Released: July '65, Atlantic
12 weeks; No. 21

Pickett's first two singles for Atlantic were recorded in New York, and they flopped. "I told Jerry Wexler I didn't want to be recorded this way anymore," Pickett said. "I said I heard a song by Otis Redding out of Memphis, and that's the direction I wanted to take." Pickett soon headed south. He and Cropper wrote "In the Midnight Hour" in the Lorraine Hotel, (where Martin Luther King, Jr. would later be assassinated), and while they were cutting the song, an idea shot Wexler out of his seat.

"I was shaking my booty to a groove made popular by the Larks' 'The Jerk,' a mid-Sixties hit," wrote Wexler. "The idea was to push the second beat while holding back the fourth." And a soul classic was born.

Appears on: The Very Best of Wilson Pickett (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Wilson Pickett


134
The Who, 'Won't Get Fooled Again'
Writer: Pete Townshend
Producers: Glyn Johns, the Who
Released: July '71, Decca
13 weeks; No. 15 

Townshend wrote this for an aborted concept album and film called Lifehouse. But many of that project's songs were resurrected for Who's Next, which started off with a week of demo sessions at Mick Jagger's country house, Stargroves. The synthesizer on "Won't Get Fooled Again" is from those demos. "Pete came up with sounds, synthesizer basics, for tracks which were just unbelievable," said producer Johns. "Nobody had done it before in that way."

"It's interesting it's been taken up in an anthemic sense," Townshend said of the song, "when in fact it's such a cautionary piece."

Appears on: Who's Next (MCA)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Who's Who's Next

• Woodstock in Photos: RS Looks Back at the Festival That Defined a Generation


133
Bo Diddley, 'Who Do You Love?'
Writer: Ellas McDaniel
Producers: Phil and Leonard Chess
Released: March '57, Checker
Did not chart

Diddley's first band performed with a washtub-bass player and a guy who danced on a sand-covered board: These experiments with rhythmic possibilities kept him from lugging a drum set around town. "I'm a lover of basic bottom," he once said. "If the bottom is right, crazy." And there's plenty of bottom here – not much more, actually. Just Diddley playing his guitar like it's a drum, goosed by maracas and lyrics about chimneys made from human skulls and houses built from rattlesnake hide that reach back into voodoo mythology (the title is a pun on "hoodoo," a bad-luck charm). 

Appears on: His Best: The Chess 50th Anniversary Collection (Chess)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bo Diddley

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Bo Diddley


132
U2, 'With or Without You'
Writers: Bono, the Edge, Adam Clayton, Larry Mullen Jr.
Producers: Brian Eno, Daniel Lanois 
Released: March '87, Island
18 weeks; No. 1

The Joshua Tree was U2's ode to America: Its songs were inspired by folk, gospel and roots music, and its lyrics, as the Edge noted, were sparked by civil rights heroes and the "new journalism" of the 1960s. Yet "With or Without You" – with its simple bass groove and ethereal guitar hum framing Bono's yearning vocals – was one of U2's most universal songs to date, a meditation on the painful ambivalence of a love affair. Bono insisted it was "about how I feel in U2 at times: exposed." It would turn out to be U2's first Number One hit in the U.S.

Appears on: The Joshua Tree (Island)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: U2

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: U2's The Joshua Tree

• U2's Rolling Stone Cover Shoot: On the Set with Bono, The Edge, Adam Clayton and Larry Mullen Jr.


131
Rod Stewart, 'Maggie May'
Writers: Stewart, Martin Quittenton
Producer: Stewart
Released: June '71, Mercury
17 weeks; No. 1

Stewart plays a schoolboy in love with an older temptress in "Maggie May" — he claimed it was "more or less a true story about the first woman I had sex with." The song, a last-minute addition to Every Picture Tells a Story, was initially the B side of "Reason to Believe." Stewart has joked that if a DJ hadn't flipped the single over, he'd have gone back to his old job: digging graves. But the song's rustic mandolin and acoustic guitars — and Mickey Waller's relentless drum-bashing — were undeniable. The song became Stewart's first U.S. Top 40 hit — and first Number One.

Appears on: Every Picture Tells a Story (Mercury/Universal)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Rod Stewart

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Rod Stewart's Every Picture Tells a Story


130
Steppenwolf, 'Born to Be Wild'
Writer: Mars Bonfire
Producer: Gabriel Mekler
Released: Jan. '68, Dunhill 
13 Weeks; No. 2  

The first two singles from Steppenwolf's 1968 debut stiffed; the third was "Born to Be Wild." It hit Number Two on the Billboard charts in the summer of '68, a year before Dennis Hopper used it in a rough cut of the movie Easy Rider, where it was originally just a place holder – actor-producer Peter Fonda had asked Crosby, Stills and Nash to do the soundtrack. But "Born to Be Wild" stayed. "Every generation thinks they're born to be wild," said frontman John Kay, "and they can identify with that song as their anthem." The line "Heavy-metal thunder" would help give a new genre its name.

Appears on: Steppenwolf (MCA)


129
Chuck Berry, 'Rock & Roll Music'
Writer: Berry 
Producers: Phil and Leonard Chess
Released: Sept. '57, Chess
19 Weeks; No. 8

This was a manifesto. "I was heavy into rock & roll and had to create something that hit the spot without question," Chuck Berry wrote in his autobiography. "I wanted the lyrics to define every aspect of its being." Set to a jolting rumba rhythm, "Rock & Roll Music" features Berry's genre-defining guitar licks and bass work from the legendary Willie Dixon. Berry's original made the Billboard Top 10, and the Beatles and the Beach Boys cut popular versions as well. For years it was this simple: If you played rock & roll, you knew this song.  

Appears on: Johnny B. Goode: His Complete '50s Chess Recordings (Chess/Hip-O Select) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Chuck Berry

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Chuck Berry

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Chuck Berry

 

 

  




128
David Bowie, 'Changes'
Writer: Bowie
Producer: Ken Scott
Released: Dec. '71, RCA
11 Weeks; No. 41

The keynote from David Bowie's 1971 album Hunky Dory, "Changes" challenged rock audiences to "turn and face the strange." But the song originally stalled on the charts in both Britain and the United States, and it didn't really take off until after the commercial success of 1972's Ziggy Stardust. Eventually, Bowie fans adopted it as the theme song for the man who'd already given them Hippie Bowie, Mod Bowie and Bluesy Bowie. As it turned out, he had barely begun to show the world his wardrobe of disguises. The poignant sax solo at the end is played by Bowie himself.

Appears on: Hunky Dory (Virgin)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: David Bowie

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: David Bowie

 


127
Big Joe Turner, 'Shake, Rattle & Roll'
Writer: Charles Calhoun
Producer: Ahmet Ertegun, Jerry Wexler
Released: April '54, Atlantic
Predates chart

Atlantic Records' contribution to the birth of rock & roll (Wexler and Ertegun even sang backup), "Shake, Rattle & Roll" was written specifically for big-voiced blues singer Turner, one of the label's early stars. "Everybody was singing slow blues when I was young, and I thought I'd put a beat to it and sing it uptempo," Turner said. This track, with its big bounce and raunchy lyrics ("I'm like a one-eyed cat peepin' in a seafood store"), topped the R&B charts; typical of the times, a sanitized cover by Bill Haley and the Comets got white America bopping. 

Appears on: The Very Best of Big Joe Turner (Rhino)

RELATED:

• Wex on Wax: Twenty Essential Jerry Wexler Productions

 

 




126
The Shirelles, 'Will You Love Me Tomorrow'
Writers: Gerry Goffin, Carole King
Producer: Luther Dixon
Released: Nov. '60, Scepter
19 weeks; No. 1

After a few minor Shirelles hits, Scepter Records founder Florence Greenberg asked King and Goffin to write the group a song. On the piano in Greenberg's office, King finished a song the team had been working on. "I remember giving her baby a bottle while Carole was writing the song," Greenberg said. Lead singer Shirley Owens initially found "Tomorrow" too countryish for the group, but Dixon's production changed her mind. King's devotion to the song was so strong she replaced a subpar percussionist and played kettledrum herself. With its forthright depiction of a sexual relationship, it became the first girl-group record to go Number One.

Appears on: Girl Group Greats (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Shirelles

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Best of the Girl Groups Volumes 1 and 2 – Various Artists


125
The Rolling Stones, 'Jumpin' Jack Flash'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: May '68, London
12 weeks; No. 3

Keith Richards was on a historic run in 1968, exploring the open-D blues-guitar tuning for the first time and coming up with some of his most dynamic riffs. He overheard an organ lick that bassist Bill Wyman was fooling around with in a London studio and turned it into the unstoppable, churning pulse of "Jumpin' Jack Flash." The lyric was inspired by Richards' gardener, Jack Dyer, who slogged past as the guitarist and Jagger were coming to the end of an all-night session. "Who's that?" Jagger asked. "Jumpin' Jack," Richards answered. The song evolved into supernatural Delta blues by way of Swinging London. The Stones first performed it at their final show with Brian Jones.

Appears on: Forty Licks (Virgin)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Rolling Stones

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Keith Richards

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mick Jagger

• Photos: Rare and Intimate Pictures of the Rolling Stones


124
James Brown, 'It's A Man's Man's Man's World'
Writers: Brown, Betty Jean Newsome
Producer: Brown
Released: April '66, King
9 weeks; No. 8

James Brown had been tinkering with the building blocks to this song for years — his singer Tammy Montgomery (who would become Tammi Terrell) had recorded the sound-alike "I Cried" in 1963. But Brown's recording of "Man's World" — a play on the 1963 cross-country chase comedy It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World — was a stunningly dramatic record. Amid swooping strings, Brown's abject singing makes the biblically chauvinistic lyrics ("Man made the boat for the water, like Noah made the ark") sound genuinely humane.

Appears on: 50th Anniversary Collection (UTV/Polydor) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: James Brown

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: James Brown

• James Brown, 1933-2006


123
The Animals, 'The House of the Rising Sun'
Writer: Alan Price
Producer: Mickie Most
Released: July '64, MGM
11 weeks; No. 1

"We were looking for a song that would grab people's attention," said Animals singer Eric Burdon. They found it with the old U.S. folk ballad "The House of the Rising Sun." In 1962, Bob Dylan had sung this grim tale of a Southern girl trapped in a New Orleans whorehouse. The Animals, from the English coal town of Newcastle, changed the gender in the lyrics, and keyboardist Price created the new arrangement (and grabbed a composer's credit). Price also added an organ solo inspired by Jimmy Smith's hit "Walk on the Wild Side."

Appears on: The Best of the Animals (ABKCO)


122
Ben E. King, 'Stand By Me'
Writers: King, Elmo Glick, Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller
Producers: Leiber, Stoller
Released: April '61, Atco
14 weeks; No. 4

Ben E. King wrote "Stand By Me" when he was still the lead singer of the Drifters — but the group didn't want it. As King recalled, the Drifters' manager told him, "Not a bad song, but we don't need it." But after King went solo, he revived "Stand By Me" at the end of a session with Leiber. "I showed him the song," King said. "Did it on piano a little bit, he called the musicians back into the studio, and we went ahead and recorded it." "Stand By Me" has been a pop-soul standard ever since, covered by everyone from John Lennon to Green Day.

Appears on: The Very Best of Ben E. King (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Drifters


121
The Jackson 5, 'I Want You Back'
Writers: Freddie Perren, Fonce Mizell, Deke Richards, Berry Gordy Jr.
Producers: Perren, Mizell, Richards, Gordy
Released: Nov. '69, Motown
19 weeks; No. 1

"I Want You Back" was the song that introduced Motown to the futuristic funk beat of Sly Stone and James Brown. It also introduced the world to an 11-year-old Indiana kid named Michael Jackson. The five dancing Jackson brothers became stars overnight; "ABC," "The Love You Save" and "I'll Be There" followed in rapid succession on the charts, but none matched the boyish fervor of "Back." It remains one of hip-hop's favorite beats, sampled everywhere from Kris Kross' "Jump" to Jay-Z's "Izzo (H.O.V.A.)."

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Michael Jackson

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Michael Jackson

• Michael Jackson at 50: Rare Early Photos, Plus A Survey of His Recent Ups and Downs


120
Fleetwood Mac, 'Go Your Own Way'
Writer: Lindsey Buckingham
Producers: Fleetwood Mac, Richard Dashut, Ken Caillat
Released: Jan. '77, Warner Bros.
15 weeks; No. 10

Quintessential Fleetwood Mac: "I very much resented him telling the world that 'packing up, shacking up' with different men was all I wanted to do," said Stevie Nicks of this Buckingham kiss-off.

Appears on: Rumours (Warner Bros.) 

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Rumours


119
The Isley Brothers, 'Shout (Parts 1 and 2)'
Writers: Rudolph Isley, Ronald Isley, O'Kelly Isley
Producers: Hugo Peretti, Luigi Creatore
Released: Sept. '59, RCA
11 weeks; No. 47

The five-minute-long workout "Shout" was a modest hit upon its original release in 1959, but it's perhaps better remembered for its appearance in the 1978 movie Animal House, where the fictional Otis Day and the Knights (with a young Robert Cray on bass) played an almost note-for-note copy of the Isley Brothers' original. As O'Kelly Isley, who helped found the group in the mid-Fifties, noted, the world was just coming around to the Isley Brothers' original sound. "People have been playin' our music in bars and discotheques for years," he told Rolling Stone in 1975, "''cause it's danceable, man."

Appears on: The Isley Brothers Story, Vol. 1: Rockin' Soul (Rhino) 


118
Beyonce feat. Jay-Z, 'Crazy in Love'
Writers: Rich Harrison, Beyonce, Jay-Z
Producers: Harrison, Beyonce
 Released: May '03, Columbia
27 weeks; No. 1

Those horns weren't a hook; they were a herald: Pop's new queen had arrived. Beyoncé's debut solo smash, powered by a brass blast sampled from the Chi-Lites' "Are You My Woman (Tell Me So)," announced her liberation from Destiny's Child and firmly established her MO: She'd best the competition by doing everything sassier, bigger, crazier. Her future husband, Jay-Z, stepped up, too — it took him just 10 minutes to create (he writes nothing down) and record his typically braggadocious cameo.

Appears on: Dangerously in Love (Columbia)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jay-Z

• Hip-Hop Royalty: How Jay-Z and Beyoncé Run This Town


117
Al Green, 'Take Me to the River'
Writers: Green, Mabon Hodges
Producer: Willie Mitchell
Released: Nov. '74, Hi
Non-single

Al Green and Hi Records house guitarist Mabon "Teenie" Hodges wrote "Take Me to the River" not by a river but by a lake: They holed up in a rented house at Lake Hamilton in Hot Springs, Arkansas, for three days in 1973 to come up with new material. "I was trying to get more stability in my life," said Green, who has famously struggled at balancing his gospel and sexy, earthier sides. "I wrote, 'Take me to the river/Wash me down/Cleanse my soul.'" When it became the first Top 40 hit for Talking Heads in late 1978, "River" gained a whole new audience.

Appears on: Al Green Explores Your Mind (The Right Stuff) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Al Green

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Al Green


116
The Rolling Stones, 'Honky Tonk Women'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: July '69, London
15 weeks; No. 1

Mick Jagger and Keith Richards came up with "Honky Tonk Women" on a South American vacation, using their girlfriends at the time, Marianne Faithfull and Anita Pallenberg, as sounding boards. Returning to the recording studio in May 1969 with pure-rock lyrics such as "I met a gin-soaked barroom queen in Memphis," the Rolling Stones recorded the song in five hours. "Honky Tonk Women" marked the debut of guitarist Mick Taylor, who overdubbed in his part; producer Jimmy Miller added some crucial cowbell, which pounded home "Honky Tonk's" strip-club bump and grind.

Appears on: Let It Bleed (ABKCO)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: the Rolling Stones

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mick Jagger

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Keith Richards

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Let It Bleed

• Photos: Rare and Intimate Pictures of the Rolling Stones


115
Sam Cooke, 'You Send Me'
Writer: Cooke
Producer: Richard "Bumps" Blackwell
Released: Oct. '57, Keen
26 weeks; No. 1 

The plan was to remake gospel star Cooke as a secular singer. But Specialty Records owner Art Rupe objected so strongly to Blackwell's use of white female backing vocalists for a session — Rupe thought that Cooke was watering his sound down too much — that he released Cooke from his contract. Major-label scouts were confused by the record, too, thinking it was too soft for R&B but too gritty for the pop charts. Then Blackwell took the tapes to Keen Records' Bob Keane, who had signed Ritchie Valens and who smelled another winner. "I said, 'Screw the black market,'" Keane said. "'This is a pop record, daddy-o!'"

Appears on: Greatest Hits (RCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Sam Cooke

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Sam Cooke


114
The Drifters, 'Up on the Roof'
Writers: Gerry Goffin, Carole King
Producers: Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller
Released: Nov. '62, Atlantic
20 weeks; No. 5

"Up on the Roof" — a breezy summertime song for city dwellers whose only getaways were the tar beaches at the top of their buildings — was written by the husband-and-wife team of Goffin and King, rising stars on New York's Tin Pan Alley scene who had broken through with the Shirelles' "Will You Love Me Tomorrow" and had already written one Drifters hit ("Some Kind of Wonderful"). It was sung by Rudy Lewis, the third in the Drifters' cavalcade of great lead voices; in 1970, King reclaimed the song as a recording artist with a wistful, downtempo version.

Appears on: The Very Best of the Drifters (Rhino) 


113
Elvis Presley, 'That's All Right'
Writer: Arthur Crudup
Producer: Sam Phillips
Released: Aug. '54, Sun
Did not chart

Presley was halfway into his first recording session, with Sun Records' Sam Phillips, when Presley pulled out "Big Boy" Crudup's 1946 blues obscurity "That's All Right," and the world changed. Recorded in a shockingly fast, lusty new style, the single was the place where race and hillbilly music collided and became rock & roll. Presley would cover two more Crudup tunes in 1956: "My Baby Left Me" and "So Glad You're Mine." Presley would remember, "I said if I ever got to the place where I could feel all old Arthur felt, I'd be a music man like nobody ever saw."

Appears on: Sunrise (RCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley


112
Hank Williams, 'I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry'
Writer: Williams
Producer: Fred Rose
Released: Nov. '49, Sterling
Did not chart

This track — a vision of lonesome Americana over a steady beat — was Williams' favorite out of all the songs he wrote. But he worried that the lyrics about weeping robins and falling stars were too artsy for his rural audience, which might explain why the track was buried on the B side of "My Bucket's Got a Hole in It." "Lonesome" didn't catch much attention, but after Williams' death it came to symbolize his whiskey-soaked life, and artists such as Willie Nelson resurrected it, setting the mood for much of the country music that followed.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Universal) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Hank Williams

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Hank Williams


111
Otis Redding, 'I've Been Loving You too Long (to Stop Now)'
Writers: Jerry Butler, Redding
Producers: Jim Stewart, Steve Cropper
Released: April '65, Volt
11 weeks; No. 21

Redding and soul balladeer "Iceman" Butler were hanging out in Redding's hotel room in Buffalo, New York, after a gig when Butler sang a half-finished song he had been working on. "Hey, man, that's a smash," Redding said. "Let me go mess around with it. Maybe I'll come up with something." Sure enough, "I've Been Loving You Too Long" became Redding's first Top 40 single, in June 1965. And when Redding performed a scorching drawn-out version at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967 — in front of the audience he called "the love crowd" — the single made the transition from hit to legend.

Appears on: Otis Blue: Otis Redding Sings Soul (Atco) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Otis Redding

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Otis Redding

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Otis Blue


110
Van Morrison, 'Brown Eyed Girl'
Writer: Morrison
Producer: Bert Berns
Released: June '67, Bang
16 weeks; No. 10

The cheery "sha-la-la" chorus of "Brown Eyed Girl," originally titled "Brown Skinned Girl," brought Morrison to the top of the pop charts, even though he didn't much like the record and recently said he doesn't even consider it one of his best 300 songs. "The record came out different," Morrison said. "This fellow, Bert, he made it the way he wanted it, and I accepted the fact that he was producing it, so I just let him do it." After its smash success, Morrison turned his back on mainstream pop. "It just put me in some awkward positions," he said. "Like lip-syncing on a television show. I can't lip-sync." His next album, the masterful Astral Weeks, was a personal acoustic song cycle that sold practically nothing.

Appears on: Blowin' Your Mind (Sony) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Van Morrison

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Van Morrison

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Astral Weeks


109
Prince, 'Little Red Corvette'
Writer: Prince
Producer: Prince
Released: March '83, Warner
22 weeks; No. 6

A horse-racing metaphor, a car metaphor and, probably, a clitoris metaphor: Prince didn't scrimp on literary possibilities in coming up with what would be his first Top 10 hit. In 1982, Prince had a 24-track studio installed in his basement; by 6 p.m. the day after it was set up, he had recorded "Little Red Corvette." The song is an almost perfect erotic fusion of rock and funk that builds slowly until exploding into a guitar solo. Fittingly, Prince wrote the lyrics in the back seat of a car, but not a red Corvette: It was a bright-pink Ford Edsel belonging to Revolution keyboardist Lisa Coleman.

Appears on: 1999 (Warner Bros.) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Prince

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Prince

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: 1999


108
Buddy Holly and the Crickets, 'Not Fade Away'
Writers: Holly, Norman Petty
Producer: Petty
Released: Oct. '57, Brunswick
20 weeks; No. 10

Recorded in Clovis, New Mexico, in May 1957, "Not Fade Away" was originally the B side to Holly's hit "Oh, Boy!" The Crickets were no strangers to the Bo Diddley beat — they had already covered "Bo Diddley" — but with "Not Fade Away" they made the rhythm their own, thanks to drummer Jerry Allison, who pounded out the beat on a cardboard box. Allison, Holly's best friend, also claims to have written most of the lyrics, though his name never appeared in the songwriting credits. In 1964, the song became the Rolling Stones' first release in the U.S.

Appears on: Greatest Hits (MCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Buddy Holly

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Buddy Holly


107
Bob Dylan, 'Mr. Tambourine Man'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Tom Wilson
Released: March '65, Columbia
Non-single

Inspired by Bruce Langhorne — a session guitarist who played on several Dylan records — "Mr. Tambourine Man" is the tune that elevated Dylan from folk hero to bona fide star. "[Bruce] was one of those characters….He had this gigantic tambourine as big as a wagon wheel," Dylan said. "The vision of him playing just stuck in my mind." Written partly during a drug-fueled cross-country trek in 1964, the song was recorded on January 15th, 1965; five days later, based on a demo (which Dylan cut with Ramblin' Jack Elliott) they'd heard, the Byrds recorded their own electrified version. "Wow, man," said Dylan, "you can even dance to that!"

Appears on: Bringing it All Back Home (Columbia) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan

• Bob Dylan at 70: His Greatest Songs, Classic Features, Photos and More


106
Simon and Garfunkel, 'The Boxer'
Writer: Paul Simon
Producers: Roy Halee, Simon, Art Garfunkel
Released: April '69, Columbia
10 weeks; No. 7

"The Boxer" is about a New York kid who can't find love, a job or a home — just those whores on Seventh Avenue. "I was reading the Bible," Simon said of the song's genesis. "That's where 'workman's wages' came from." He sang the song as a tribute to New York on the first Saturday Night Live after 9/11.

Appears on: Bridge Over Troubled Water (Columbia)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Simon and Garfunkel

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Art Garfunkel

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Bridge Over Troubled Water


105
Stevie Wonder, 'Living for the City'
Writer: Wonder
Producer: Wonder
Released: August '73, Tamla
17 weeks; No. 8

Wonder went epic with "Living for the City," a bleak seven-minute narrative about the broken dreams of black America that was so powerful, Richard Pryor later recorded the lyrics delivered as a church sermon. Wonder sings about a boy growing up in the mythical town of Hard Times, Mississippi, surrounded by poverty and racism. When he takes the bus to New York in search of a better life, he gets set up for a drug bust and goes to jail. Wonder filled the song with cinematic dialogue, even recruiting one of the janitors at the recording studio to play the white prison guard who mutters, "Get into that cell, nigger." Public Enemy sampled the line years later on It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back.

Appears on: Innervisions (Motown) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Stevie Wonder

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Stevie Wonder

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Innervisions


104
Donna Summer, 'Hot Stuff'
Writers: Pete Bellotte, Harold Faltermeyer, Keith Forsey
Producer: Giorgio Moroder, Bellotte
Released: April '79, Casablanca
21 weeks; No. 1

The Rolling Stones' "Miss You" and Rod Stewart's "Da Ya Think I'm Sexy" approached disco from the world of rock. Now Summer and producer Moroder wanted to return the favor. Setting a thumping kick-drum pulse against a raunchy guitar solo from Doobie Brother (and disco hater) Jeff "Skunk" Baxter, they paved the way for such hybrids as Michael Jackson's "Beat It." The Queen of Disco snarled with an assertiveness rarely heard on her earlier Euro-disco hits. The 12-inch memorably segues directly into Summer's follow-up, "Bad Girls."

Appears on: Bad Girls (Mercury/Chronicles) 


103
Gene Vincent and His Blue Caps, 'Be-Bop-A-Lula'
Writers: Vincent, Bill Davis
Producer: Ken Nelson
Released: May '56, Capitol
20 weeks; No. 7

With Vincent's echo-soaked voice, Cliff Gallup's high-reverb guitar and 15-year-old drummer Dickie Harrell's wildcat screams, "Be-Bop-A-Lula" went to Number Seven in 1956. Vincent signed to Capitol, which had been hunting for its own Elvis-type singer. A restless sort, Vincent joined the Navy while still underage and nearly had his leg amputated after a motorcycle crackup. He reportedly wrote "Be-Bop-A-Lula" with a fellow patient while recuperating at a naval hospital.

Appears on: The Screaming End: The Best of Gene Vincent and His Blue Caps (Razor and Tie) 


102
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, 'Voodoo Child (Slight Return)'
Writer: Jimi Hendrix
Producer: Chas Chandler
Released: Oct. '68, Reprise
Non-single

After a night of partying in New York on May 2nd, 1968, Hendrix, Experience drummer Mitch Mitchell, Traffic's Stevie Winwood and Jefferson Airplane's Jack Casady returned to Electric Ladyland studio and cut "Voodoo Chile," a 15-minute take on Muddy Waters' "Rolling Stone." Later that day, Hendrix, Mitchell and bassist Noel Redding were being filmed by a TV crew. Hendrix improvised the staggering wah-wah guitar riff that kicks off the apocalyptic blues "Voodoo Child (Slight Return)" on the spot. "It was like, 'OK, boys, look like we're recording,'" Hendrix said. "We weren't thinking about what we were playing."

Appears on: Electric Ladyland (MCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Electric Ladyland


101
The Rolling Stones, 'You Can't Always Get What You Want'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: July '69, London
8 weeks; No. 42

After a November 1968 recording session, Al Kooper asked Jagger if he could take a stab at a horn chart for a new song. Kooper got his wish, but only his French horn made the final mix, providing "You Can't Always Get What You Want" with its signature intro. The song's piano groove was based on an Etta James record, and producer Miller — "Mr. Jimmy" in the Jagger lyric — subbed for Charlie Watts when the Stones drummer had difficulty mastering the tricky groove. Phil Spector accomplice Jack Nitzsche provided the crowning touch in March 1969, orchestrating the London Bach Choir into a towering backing chorus. A grandiose finale for a landmark album.

Appears on: Let It Bleed (ABKCO)

100
Gnarls Barkley, 'Crazy'
Writers: Brian Burton, Thomas Calloway, Gianfranco Reverberi, Gian Piero Reverberi
Producer: Danger Mouse
Released: May '06, Downtown
24 weeks; No. 2

"Crazy" was a rarity in the 2000s: a universal pop smash that was played on virtually every radio format — it went Top 10 on both the pop and the modern-rock charts — and was covered by singers from Nelly Furtado to Billy Idol. The lyrics, which celebrate risk-taking, came out of a conversation Cee-Lo and Danger Mouse had in the studio: The pair decided that their genre-smashing collaborations were indeed "crazy." With a haunting melody inspired by spaghetti Western soundtrack-composer Ennio Morricone, "Crazy" didn't feel like a hit. "It seemed too out there for urban radio and too urban for rock radio," Danger Mouse told Rolling Stone.

Appears on: St. Elsewhere (Downtown)


99
Creedence Clearwater Revival, 'Fortunate Son'
Writer: John Fogerty
Producer: Fogerty
Released: Oct. '69, Fantasy
14 weeks; No. 14

"Fortunate Son" is a blast at rich folks who plan wars and then draft poor people to fight them. Fogerty wrote it out of disgust at the fancy wedding plans of Richard Nixon's daughter. "You just had the feeling that none of these people were going to be too involved with the war," he said.

Appears on: Willy and the Poor Boys (Fantasy) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: John Fogerty

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: John Fogerty

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Willie and the Poor Boys


98
Al Green, 'Love and Happiness'
Writers: Green, Mabon "Teenie" Hodges
Producer: Willie Mitchell
Released: June '72, Hi
12 weeks; No. 3

"Sixty percent of my audience are women," Green once said. "And a woman is more sensitive than a man, especially in the area of love and happiness." Hodges wrote the urgent, romantic "Love and Happiness" one morning in between having sex with his girlfriend and watching wrestling on TV. Green recently claimed that Hodges sang him the opening guitar riff on a road trip and they drove 160 miles back to Memphis to record it that night. He has described the song as "like a slow fever, building on the beat, pushing up the temperature with each breath of the staccato horns and pushing through delirium as we came up on the fade."

Appears on: I'm Still in Love With You (Capitol) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Al Green

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Al Green

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: I'm Still in Love With You


97
Chuck Berry, 'Roll Over Beethoven'
Writer: Berry
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess
Released: May '56, Chess
5 weeks; No. 29

"I wanted to play the blues," Chuck Berry told Rolling Stone. "But I wasn't blue enough. We always had food on the table." Berry originally wrote this guitar anthem as an affectionate dig at his sister Lucy, who spent so much time playing classical music on the family piano that young Chuck couldn't get a turn. But "Roll Over Beethoven" became the ultimate rock & roll call to arms, declaring a new era: "Roll over, Beethoven/And tell Tchaikovsky the news." Berry announced this changing of the musical guard with a blazing guitar riff and pounding piano from sidekick Johnnie Johnson.

Appears on: The Anthology (Chess) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Chuck Berry

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Chuck Berry

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Chuck Berry


96
Jerry Lee Lewis, 'Great Balls of Fire'
Writers: Otis Blackwell, Jack Hammer
Producer: Sam Phillips
Released: Nov. '57, Sun
21 weeks; No. 2

With Lewis pounding the piano and leering, "Great Balls of Fire" was full of Southern Baptist hellfire turned into a near-blasphemous ode to pure lust. Lewis, a Bible-college dropout and cousin to Jimmy Swaggart, refused to sing it at first and got into a theological argument with Phillips that concluded with Lewis asking, "How can the devil save souls?" But as the session wore on and the liquor kept flowing, Lewis' mood changed considerably — on bootleg tapes he can be heard saying, "I would like to eat a little pussy if I had some." Goodness gracious, great balls of fire, indeed.

Appears on: Original Sun Greatest Hits (Rhino) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jerry Lee Lewis

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Jerry Lee Lewis


95
Carl Perkins, 'Blue Suede Shoes'
Writer: Perkins
Producer: Sam Phillips
Released: Feb '56, Sun
21 weeks; No. 2

Johnny Cash had already given Perkins the phrase "blue suede shoes" as an idea for a song. But when he overheard a Tennessee hepcat who was trying to keep the girl he was dancing with from scuffing up his new kicks, Perkins was inspired to write the song that would be his Sun debut. It was the first single to crack the pop, R&B and country charts, and Perkins was driving to New York to perform the song on The Perry Como Show when his car crashed into a poultry truck, laying him up for weeks. He could only sit home and watch while "Blue Suede Shoes" was performed on The Milton Berle Show — sung by Elvis Presley, who would later admit he couldn't top Perkins' original.

Appears on: Original Sun Greatest Hits (Rhino) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Carl Perkins


94
Little Richard, 'Good Golly, Miss Molly'
Writers: Robert "Bumps" Blackwell, John Marascalco
Producer: Blackwell
Released: Feb. '58, Specialty
15 weeks; No. 10

Little Richard first heard the phrase "Good golly, Miss Molly," from a Southern DJ named Jimmy Pennick. He turned the words into perhaps his most blatant assault on American propriety: "Good golly, Miss Molly/You sure like to ball." He swiped the music from Ike Turner's piano intro to Jackie Brenston's "Rocket 88," recorded by Sam Phillips in Memphis seven years earlier. "I always liked that record," Richard recalled, "and I used to use the riff in my act, so when we were looking for a lead-in to 'Good Golly, Miss Molly,' I did that and it fit." Richard had renounced rock & roll the previous year, but Specialty couldn't leave this classic in the vaults.

Appears on: The Georgia Peach (Specialty)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Little Richard

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Little Richard


93
U2, 'I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For'
Writer: Bono
Producers: Daniel Lanois, Brian Eno
Released: May '87, Island
17 weeks; No. 1

"The music that really turns me on is either running toward God or away from God," Bono told Rolling Stone. U2's second Number One single revels in ambivalence — "an anthem of doubt more than faith," Bono has called it. The song was typical of the arduous sessions for The Joshua Tree: Originally called "Under the Weather," it began, like most U2 songs, as a jam. "It sounded to me a little like 'Eye of the Tiger' played by a reggae band," the Edge recalled. "It had this great beat," Lanois said. "I remember humming a traditional melody in Bono's ear. He said, 'That's it! Don't sing any more!' — and went off and wrote the melody as we know it."

Appears on: The Joshua Tree (Island) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: U2

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bono

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Joshua Tree


92
Ramones, 'Blitzkrieg Bop'
Writers: The Ramones
Producer: Craig Leon
Released: May '76, Sire
Did not chart

In less than three minutes, this song threw down the blueprint for punk rock. It's all here on the opening track of the Ramones' debut: the buzz-saw chords, which Johnny played on his $50 Mosrite guitar; the snotty words, courtesy of drummer Tommy (with bassist Dee Dee adding the brilliant line "Shoot 'em in the back now"); and the hairball-in-the-throat vocals, sung by Joey in a faux British accent. Recorded on the cheap at New York's Radio City Music Hall, of all places, "Blitzkrieg Bop" never made the charts; instead, it almost single-handedly created a world beyond the charts. The kick-off chant "Hey! Ho! Let's go!" meanwhile, is now an anthem of its own at sporting events nationwide.

Appears on: Ramones (Rhino)

100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Ramones

500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Ramones

The Ramones Gallery

The Ramones Photos


91
Elvis Presley, 'Suspicious Minds'
Writer: Mark James
Producers: Chips Moman, Felton Jarvis, Presley
Released: Sept. '69, RCA
15 weeks; No. 1

When Moman presented this song to Presley in 1969, the singer was, as the lyrics put it, "caught in a trap" — a cash cow being milked dry by his label and hangers-on. That might be why Presley was convinced he could turn the song into a deep-soul hit, even though it had flopped in 1968 for singer-songwriter Mark James. Recorded between four and seven in the morning, during the landmark Memphis session that helped return the King to his throne, "Suspicious Minds" — the final Number One single of his lifetime — is Presley's masterpiece: He sings so intensely through the fade-out that his band returns for another minute of the tear-stained chorus.

Appears on: Elvis 30 #1 Hits (RCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley


90
The Five Satins, 'In the Still of the Night'
Writer: Fred Parris
Producers: The Five Satins
Released: Sept. '56, Standord
19 weeks; No. 24

Five Satins frontman Parris wrote the song while on guard duty in the Army, and the group recorded it in the basement of a church in Parris' hometown of New Haven, Connecticut. The roughness shows: The drums and piano are muffled, the alto sax cracks during the solo, and the backing vocals wander off-key. But the primitive sound — and the fact that only four of the Five Satins were even present for the session — can't keep "In the Still of the Night," originally released as a B side, from being a sublime, definitive piece of doo-wop.

Appears on: The Five Satins: Their Greatest Hits (Collectables) 


89
The Mamas and the Papas, 'California Dreamin''
Writers: John and Michelle Phillips
Producer: Lou Adler
Released: Dec. '65, Dunhill
17 weeks; No. 4

One frigid winter in Manhattan, a song came to John Phillips in the middle of the night. He woke up his young wife, Michelle, who was homesick for the West Coast, to help him finish writing "California Dreamin'," one of the all-time sunniest songs of longing. The tune was first recorded by Phillips' folk group the New Journeymen and later given to Barry McGuire as a thank-you after McGuire, riding high with "Eve of Destruction," introduced the group to producer Lou Adler, who convinced the Mamas and the Papas to cut it themselves.

Appears on: If You Can Believe Your Eyes and Ears (MCA) 


88
The Temptations, 'My Girl'
Writers: Smokey Robinson, Ronald White
Producers: Robinson, White
Released: Jan. '65, Gordy
13 weeks; No. 1

The Temptations were sharing a bill with Robinson and his group the Miracles at Harlem's Apollo Theater when Robinson took time out to cut the rhythm track for a new song. After they heard it, the Tempts begged him to let them record the song rather than the Miracles, as he had been planning. Robinson relented and chose the throaty tenor David Ruffin to sing lead, the first time he had done so with the group. The Tempts rehearsed the song that week at the Apollo, then recorded it back home in Detroit on December 21st, 1964.

Appears on: The Temptations Sing Smokey (Motown) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Temptations


87
Johnny Cash, 'Ring of Fire'
Writers: June Carter, Merle Kilgore
Producer: Don Law
Released: May '63, Columbia
13 weeks; No. 17

Carter wrote this song while driving around aimlessly one night, worried about Cash's wildman ways — and aware that she couldn't resist him. "There is no way to be in that kind of hell, no way to extinguish a flame that burns, burns, burns," she wrote. Not long after hearing June's sister Anita's take on the song, Cash had a dream that he was singing it with mariachi horns. Cash's version became one of his biggest hits (inspiring cover versions by everyone from Frank Zappa to Adam Lambert), and his marriage to June four years later helped save his life.

Appears on: The Man in Black: His Greatest Hits (Columbia) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Johnny Cash

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Johnny Cash

• Photos: Intimate, All-Access Shots of Johnny Cash


86
Bruce Springsteen, 'Thunder Road'
Writer: Springsteen
Producers: Springsteen, Jon Landau, Mike Appel
Released: Aug. '75, Columbia
Non-single

"We decided to make a guitar album, but then I wrote all the songs on piano," Springsteen said of his third album, Born to Run. "Thunder Road," its opening track, is a cinematic tale of redemption with a title borrowed from a 1958 hillbilly noir starring Robert Mitchum as a bootlegger with a car that can't be beat (though the Boss had never actually seen the movie). An early title for the song was "Wings for Wheels," which resurfaced as the name of a Born to Run documentary. Decades later, Springsteen would marvel that he wrote the line "You're scared, and you're thinking that maybe we ain't that young anymore" when he was all of 24 years old.

Appears on: Born to Run (Columbia) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bruce Springsteen

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bruce Springsteen

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Born to Run


85
Patsy Cline, 'Crazy'
Writer: Willie Nelson
Producer: Owen Bradley
Released: Oct. '61, Decca
11 weeks; No. 9

Cline wasn't impressed when her husband, Charlie Dick, brought home a demo by a 28-year-old rookie Nashville songwriter named Willie Nelson. Told that the song's title was "Crazy," she responded, "It sure is." But Bradley helped Cline make the song her own with a lush arrangement and understated backing vocals from gospel group the Jordanaires. Cline's vocals, cut in one take, infused Nelson's lyrics with slow-burn sex appeal. "Crazy" set the stage for a sophisticated new phase of the C&W sound known as "countrypolitan," although Cline herself wouldn't be around to shape it: She died in a plane crash less than two years later.

Appears on: Patsy Cline's Greatest Hits (MCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Patsy Cline


84
The Police, 'Every Breath You Take'
Writer: Sting
Producer: Hugh Padgham
Released: May '83, A&M
22 weeks; No 1

For their biggest hit, the Police went back to basics, junking an elaborate synth part that distracted from the song's hypnotic bass line in favor of a lick that guitarist Andy Summers recorded in one live take. Sting admitted that the lyrics — which sounded tender but were actually bitter — were pulled from the rock & roll cliche handbook. "'Every Breath You Take' is an archetypal song," he told Rolling Stone. "If you have a major chord followed by a relative minor, you're not original." Following Sting's unoriginal-and-proud manifesto, Puff Daddy would sample "Breath" extensively 14 years later for his own huge hit, the Notorious B.I.G. tribute "I'll Be Missing You."

Appears on: Synchronicity (Interscope) 

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Synchronicity


83
The Beatles, 'Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Dec. '65, Capitol 
Non-single

This wry, wistful folk ballad was among the first of the Beatles' revolutionary studio experiments. The inclusion of the sitar, an instrument that George Harrison had recently discovered, was groundbreaking. The song, written by Lennon, is the tale of a late-night tryst — although it's electric with sexual possibility, the bemused cad ends up sleeping in the bathtub (and maybe takes his revenge by burning the place down the next morning). Lennon said that the lyrics disguised an actual affair: "I was very careful and paranoid because I didn't want my wife, Cyn, to know that there was something going on."

Appears on: Rubber Soul (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: John Lennon


82
Fats Domino, 'Blueberry Hill'
Writers: Al Lewis, Larry Stock, Vincent Rose
Producer: Dave Bartholomew
Released: Oct. '56, Imperial 
27 weeks; No. 2

"Blueberry Hill" was first recorded in 1940 by several artists, including Gene Autry and Glenn Miller. But Domino drew on the 1949 Louis Armstrong version when he had run out of material at a session. Producer Bartholomew thought it was a terrible idea but lost the argument. Good thing, too. It ended up being Domino's biggest hit and broadened his audience once and for all. As Carl Perkins later said, "In the white honky-tonks where I was playin', they were punchin' 'Blueberry Hill.' And white cats were dancin' to Fats Domino."

Appears on: The Fats Domino Jukebox (Capitol) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Fats Domino


81
Marvin Gaye, 'I Heard It Through the Grapevine'
Writers: Barrett Strong, Norman Whitfield
Producer: Whitfield
Released: Oct. '68, Tamla 
15 weeks; No. 1

Motown producer Whitfield had a reputation for recording the same song with a number of acts, changing the arrangement each time. This irritated some of the label's artists, but every now and then he would get a golden idea — as happened with Gaye's 1968 version of "Grapevine," which had been a hit the year before for Gladys Knight. Whitfield and co-writer Strong set the track in a slower, more mysterious tempo, and the song — which Gaye initially resisted recording — became the bestselling Motown single of the decade.

Appears on: Every Motown Hit (Motown) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Marvin Gaye

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Marvin Gaye


80
The Kinks, 'You Really Got Me'
Writer: Ray Davies
Producer: Shel Talmy
Released: Sept. '64, Reprise 
15 weeks; No. 7

Convinced that the band's previous two singles had flopped because they were too pristine, the Kinks went into the studio in the summer of 1964 to record this deliberately raw rave-up, written by Ray Davies on the piano in his parents' living room. But the original recording still felt too shiny, and the band had to borrow 200 pounds to cover the cost of another session. Seventeen-year-old guitarist Dave Davies took a razor to the speaker cone on his amp to get the desired dirty sound for that immortal, blistering riff. "The song came out of a working-class environment," Dave recalled. "People fighting for something." A month later, the proto-heavy-metal song went straight to the top of the British charts.

Appears on: Kinks (Castle) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Kinks

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Dave Davies


79
The Byrds, 'Mr. Tambourine Man'
Writer: Bob Dylan
Producer: Terry Melcher
Released: May '65, Columbia
13 weeks; No. 1

The only Byrd to play on the band's first hit was Roger McGuinn, whose chiming 12-string Rickenbacker guitar became folk rock's defining sound. Everything else came from L.A. session players, including drummer Hal Blaine and bassist Larry Knechtel of Phil Spector's Wrecking Crew. But the rest of the Byrds soon caught up, and as the song was breaking, a curious Dylan checked out the band at Ciro's, a Los Angeles club. Reportedly, he didn't recognize some of his own songs in their electrified versions.

Appears on: Mr. Tambourine Man (Columbia/Legacy)


78
James Brown, 'I Got You (I Feel Good)'
Writer: Brown
Producer: Brown
Released: Nov. '65, King
12 weeks; No. 3

The same year he hit with "Papa's Got a Brand New Bag," Soul Brother Number One scored his biggest pop success with "I Got You." It was a sped-up, hyped-up new version of a song called "I Found You" that Brown had written a few years previous for one of his early proteges, James Brown Revue singer Yvonne Fair. "I Got You" received some help on the pop charts from a most unlikely source; a few months before the single was released, Brown performed the song in the Frankie Avalon teen flick Ski Party.

Appears on: James Brown 50th Anniversary Collection (UTV/Polydor) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: James Brown

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: James Brown

• James Brown, 1933-2006


77
Elvis Presley, 'Mystery Train'
Writer: Junior Parker, Sam Phillips
Producer: Phillips
Released: Sept. '55, Sun
Did not chart

"Mystery Train" is one of Presley's most haunting songs, a stark blues number that sounds ancient but was actually first cut only two years before by Memphis blues singer Junior Parker. Presley recorded it with the groove from the flip side of the same Parker single, "Love My Baby," and Sun producer Phillips' taut, rubbery echo effect made guitarist Scotty Moore's every note sound doubled. Presley added a final verse — "Train . . . took my baby, but it never will again" — capped by a celebratory falsetto whoop that transformed a pastoral about death into a song about the power to overcome it.

Appears on: Sunrise (RCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley


76
The Beatles, 'Strawberry Fields Forever'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Feb. '67, Capitol
9 weeks; No. 8

Lennon often considered "Strawberry Fields Forever" his greatest accomplishment with the Beatles. The song, a surreal kaleidoscope of sound, was the first track recorded for Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (although it was released as a single instead). The lyrics are a nostalgic look at Lennon's Liverpool childhood and an expression of his own pride. Said Lennon, "The second line goes, 'No one I think is in my tree.' Well, what I was trying to say in that line is, 'Nobody seems to be as hip as me, therefore I must be crazy or a genius.'"

Appears on: Magical Mystery Tour (Capitol)  

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: John Lennon

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band


75
Led Zeppelin, 'Whole Lotta Love'
Writers: Willie Dixon, Led Zeppelin
Producer: Jimmy Page
Released: Oct. '69, Atlantic
15 weeks; No. 4

The members of Led Zeppelin first got their sound together by jamming on blues standards, stretching them out into psychedelic orgies. "Whole Lotta Love" was a tribute to Chicago blues songwriter Willie Dixon, based on his "You Need Love," a Muddy Waters single from 1962 (though Robert Plant also threw in quotes from songs Dixon wrote for Howlin' Wolf). The copyright issues weren't sorted out until 1985, when Dixon brought legal action and got his rightful share of the credit for "Whole Lotta Love." "Page's riff was Page's riff," Plant said. "I just thought, 'Well, what am I going to sing?' That was it, a nick. Now happily paid for." Said Page, "Usually my riffs are pretty damn original. What can I say?"

Appears on: Led Zeppelin II (Atlantic) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Led Zeppelin

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Led Zeppelin II

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimmy Page

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Robert Plant

• Classic Led Zeppelin: Onstage and Behind the Scenes 1969-1985


74
Eddie Cochran, 'Summertime Blues'
Writers: Cochran, Jerry Capehart
Producer: Capehart
Released: July '58, Liberty
16 weeks; No. 8

Cochran's label tried molding him into a crooning teen idol, but he made his mark with a string of rockabilly ravers written with partner Capehart. Explaining the inspiration for this classic, Capehart said, "There had been a lot of songs about summer, but none about the hardships of summer." With that idea and a guitar lick from Cochran, they knocked out the song in 45 minutes.

Appears on: Somethin' Else (Razor and Tie) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Eddie Cochran


73
Stevie Wonder, 'Superstition'
Writer: Wonder
Producers: Wonder, Malcolm Cecil, Robert Margouleff
Released: Nov. '72, Tamla
16 weeks; No. 1

Wonder debuted this hard blast of funk live while opening for the Rolling Stones in the summer of 1972, intent on expanding his audience. The 22-year-old former child star had written it at the drum set, humming the other parts to himself. Wonder had initially intended for Jeff Beck to record the song, but Berry Gordy wouldn't let him give it away. It became the first single from Talking Book — and Wonder's first Number One hit in nearly a decade.

Appears on: Talking Book (Motown)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Stevie Wonder

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Stevie Wonder

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Talking Book


72
The Beach Boys, 'California Girls'
Writers: Brian Wilson, Mike Love
Producer: Wilson
Released: July '65, Capitol
11 weeks; No. 3

The first time Wilson took acid, he sat at the piano and wrote the brooding, beautiful opening bars to "California Girls." It was a breakthrough moment, Wilson has said, that led him to begin creating more complex, emotional music. The lyrics, written by Love, were inspired by Wilson's assertion that "everybody loves girls." And despite the teen-fantasy theme, the singing is tougher than earlier Beach Boys hits, with tightly wound harmonies and an aggressive lead vocal. "I taught Mike to sing with attitude," said Wilson. "I was trying to create a new Beach Boys sound."

Appears on: Sounds of Summer: The Very Best of the Beach Boys (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beach Boys

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Brian Wilson


71
James Brown, 'Papa's Got A Brand New Bag'
Writer: Brown
Producer: Brown
Released: July '66, King

13 weeks; No. 8

In mid-1965, Brown was locked in a contract struggle with King Records, but when he learned King was nearly bankrupt, he threw the label a bone: a song he'd recorded a few months earlier, yelling, "This is a hit!" as the tape rolled. Arguably the first funk record, it's driven by the empty space between beats as much as by Brown's bellow and guitarist Jimmy Nolen's ice-chipper scratch. In a stroke of postproduction genius (you can hear the original recording on the Grammy-winning Star Time box set), Brown sliced off the intro to have the song start with a face-smashing horn blast, and sped it up just enough so it sounded like an urgent bulletin from the future.

Appears on: 50th Anniversary Collection (UTV/Polydor) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: James Brown

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: James Brown


70
Dionne Warwick, 'Walk On By'
Writers: Burt Bacharach, Hal David
Producers: Bacharach, David
Released: April '64, Scepter
13 weeks, No. 6

Early in her career, Warwick was a back-up singer who also cut demos for Brill Building songwriters Bacharach and David. This forlorn classic solidified her stardom, capping a series of singles in which she played the pleading lover. A downcast ballad set to a bossa nova beat, it was originally relegated to the B side of "Any Old Time of the Day," until New York DJ Murray the K asked listeners to vote on the single's two sides. The winning cut scaled the charts during the heady exuberance of Beatlemania, which provided an unwitting foil for the understated perseverance of "Walk On By." "I didn't get the guy very often in those days," Warwick said.

Appears on: The Dionne Warwick Collection: Her All-Time Greatest Hits 


69
Roy Orbison, 'Crying'
Writers: Joe Melson, Orbison
Producer: Fred Foster
Released: Aug. '61, Monument
16 weeks; No. 2

Orbison said he wrote this lush, dreamy ballad after an encounter with an old flame: "Whether I was physically crying or just crying inside is the same thing." His near-operatic performance culminated in a high, wailing note, which Orbison never lost the capacity to hit until his death in 1988. "He sounded like he was singing from an Olympian mountaintop and he meant business," Bob Dylan wrote in Chronicles. "He was now singing his compositions in three or four octaves that made you want to drive your car over a cliff. He sang like a professional criminal."

Appears on: For the Lonely: 18 Greatest Hits (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Roy Orbison

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Roy Orbison


68
Bob Dylan, 'Tangled Up in Blue'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Dylan
Released: Jan. '75, Columbia
7 weeks, No. 31

When Dylan introduced "Tangled Up in Blue" onstage in 1978, he described it as a song that took him "10 years to live and two years to write." It's still one of his most frequently performed live staples. It was the six-minute opener from Blood on the Tracks, written as his first marriage was falling apart. Dylan takes inspiration from classic country singers like Hank Williams and Lefty Frizzell, in a tale of a drifting heart on the road through the Sixties and Seventies. Dylan kept revising the song heavily through the years; on his 1984 Real Live, he plays with the chords and lyrics to tell a whole new story.

Appears on: Blood on the Tracks (Columbia) 

RELATED:

• 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

• 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan

• 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Blood on the Tracks

• Bob Dylan at 70: His Best Songs, Classic Features, Photos and More


67
Elvis Presley, 'Jailhouse Rock'
Writers: Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller
Producer: Steve Sholes
Released: Oct. '57, RCA 
27 weeks, No. 1

Songwriters Leiber and Stoller had already penned a couple of Presley hits — most notably "Hound Dog," picked up from blues belter Big Mama Thornton — but the theme song for Presley's third movie was the duo's first studio collaboration with the young superstar. "Jailhouse Rock" was decidedly silly, the kind of tongue-in-cheek narrative goof they had been coming up with for the Coasters. The King, however, sang it as straight rock & roll, overlooking the humor in the lyrics (like the suggestion of gay romance when inmate Number 47 tells Number 3, "You're the cutest jailbird I ever did see") and introducing Scotty Moore's guitar solo with a cry so intense that the take almost collapses.

Appears on: Elvis 30 #1 Hits (RCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley

• Young Elvis Presley: A Look Back at the King at 21 on His 75th Birthday


66
Bob Marley and the Wailers, 'Redemption Song'
Writer: Marley
Producer: Chris Blackwell
Released: June '80, Island
Did not chart

Marley had already recorded a version of this freedom hymn with his band when Island Records' chief Blackwell suggested he try it as an acoustic-style folk tune. Inspired by the writings of Marcus Garvey, Marley's lyrics offer up music as an antidote to slavery, both mental and physical. "I would love to do more like that," Marley said a few months before his death, from cancer, at age 36 in 1981. As the final track on his final album, "Redemption Song" stands as his epitaph.

Appears on: Uprising (Island) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Marley

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Marley

• Intimate Moments with Bob Marley During the Golden Age of Reggae


65
Cream, 'Sunshine of Your Love'
Writers: Jack Bruce, Pete Brown, Eric Clapton
Producer: Felix Pappalardi
Released: Jan. '68, Atco
26 weeks; No. 5 

Bassist Bruce and lyricist-poet Brown came up with "Sunshine" toward the end of an all-night session, which inspired the opening line: "It's getting near dawn/When lights close their tired eyes." The killer riff was inspired by Jimi Hendrix and based on a bass ostinato from Bruce; Clapton added the chorus hook, and drummer Ginger Baker laid down a mammoth, tom-tom-heavy beat. Bruce knew "Sunshine" would do well, but Atlantic Records nearly rejected it until some of the label's biggest acts started championing the record. "Both Booker T. Jones and Otis Redding heard it and told me it was going to be a smash," he recalled.

Appears on: Disraeli Gears (Polydor) 

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Disraeli Gears

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Eric Clapton

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Eric Clapton


64
The Beatles, 'She Loves You'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney 
Producer: George Martin 
Released: Sept. '63, Swan 
15 weeks; No. 1

Lennon and McCartney began writing this song on a tour van, and George Harrison dreamed up the harmonies, which Martin found "corny." The band overruled Martin on the harmonies, but they took his suggestion to kick off the song with the jubilant chorus. When McCartney's father heard the song, he said, "Son, there are enough Americanisms around. Couldn't you sing, 'Yes, yes, yes,' just for once?" McCartney said, "You don't understand, Dad. It wouldn't work."

Appears on: The Beatles 1 (Capitol/Apple) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles


63
Buffalo Springfield, 'For What It's Worth'
Writer: Stephen Stills
Producers: Charles Greene, Brian Stone
Released: Feb. '67, Atco
15 weeks, No. 7

As police and teens clashed on L.A.'s Sunset Strip, Neil Young's guitar tolled like a funeral bell; the Summer of Love was unraveling before it even began. "It turned out to be indicative of what was about to happen," said Stills.

Appears on: Buffalo Springfield (Elektra) 


62
Bo Diddley, 'Bo Diddley'
Writer: Ellas McDaniel
Producers: Phil and Leonard Chess
Released: June '55, Checker 
Did not chart

Didley's first single went to Number One on the R&B charts and immortalized the bedrock beat that would power everything from Buddy Holly's "Not Fade Away" to the Smiths' "How Soon Is Now." The song originated as a sexually suggestive ditty titled "Uncle John," but the Chess brothers asked Diddley to clean up its lyrics and give it a more memorable title to match its otherworldly sound. Diddley, who studied violin as a child and built his own instruments, wrote songs that were deceptively simple, driven by interplay between the bass, drums and his tremolo guitar. But you can't copyright a beat, and Diddley never reaped the rewards for his greatest innovation.

Appears on: His Best: The Chess 50th Anniversary Collection (Chess) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bo Diddley

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Bo Diddley


61
Jerry Lee Lewis, 'Whole Lotta Shakin' Going On'
Writers: Dave Williams, Roy Hall
Producer: Jack Clement
Released: June '57, Sun
29 weeks; No. 3

When Lewis decided to record what would be his breakthrough hit, it had already been cut four times and gone nowhere. Lewis filled it with frantic piano and filthy instructions ("All you got to do, honey, is kinda stand in one spot/Wiggle around just a little bit"). But what really made "Whole Lotta Shakin' Going On" work was producer Cowboy Jack Clement's decision to turn the session over to the manic energy of Lewis' live shows. "I just simply turned on the machine, mixed it on the fly," he said. After Lewis played a fiery version of "Shakin'" on Steve Allen's TV show, the song went on to sell more than 6 million copies.

Appears on: Original Sun Greatest Hits (Rhino) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jerry Lee Lewis

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Jerry Lee Lewis


60
Al Green, 'Let's Stay Together'
Writers: Al Green, Al Jackson Jr., Willie Mitchell
Producer: Mitchell
Released: Dec. '71, Hi
16 weeks; No. 1

After Mitchell gave Green a rough mix of a tune he and drummer Jackson had worked out, Green wrote the lyrics in five minutes. Still, Green didn't want to record the song and fought with Mitchell for two days before finally agreeing to cut it. The recording was finished late on a Friday night in the fall of 1971; Mitchell pressed the single on Monday, and by Thursday Green was told that "Let's Stay Together" would be entering the charts at Number Eight. Within two weeks, it had reached Number One on the R&B charts, and in February 1972, the warm, buoyant love song gave Green his only Number One pop hit.

Appears on: Let's Stay Together (The Right Stuff)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Al Green

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Al Green


59
Bob Dylan, 'The Times They Are A-Changin'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Bob Johnston
Released: Jan. '64, Columbia
Did not chart 

"I wanted to write a big song, some kind of theme song, with short, concise verses that piled up on each other in a hypnotic way," said Dylan. "This is definitely a song with a purpose." Inspired by Scottish and Irish folk ballads and released less than two months after the assassination of John F. Kennedy, "The Times They Are A-Changin'" became an immediate Sixties anthem and was covered by artists ranging from the Byrds to Cher to Eddie Vedder. Said Dylan, "I knew exactly what I wanted to say and who I wanted to say it to."

Appears on: The Times They Are A-Changin' (Columbia)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan

• Bob Dylan at 70: His Best Songs, Classic Features, Photos and More


58
Michael Jackson, 'Billie Jean'
Writer: Jackson
Producers: Jackson, Quincy Jones
Released: Jan. '83, Epic
7 weeks; No. 1

Sinuous, paranoid and omnipresent: The single that made Jackson the biggest star since Elvis was a denial of a paternity suit, and it spent seven weeks at Number One on the pop charts. Jackson came up with the irresistible rhythm track on his home drum machine and he nailed the vocals in one take. "I knew the song was going to be big," Jackson said. "I was really absorbed in writing it." How absorbed? Jackson said he was thinking about "Billie Jean" while riding in his Rolls-Royce down the Ventura Freeway in California — and didn't notice the car was on fire.

Appears on: Thriller (Sony)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Michael Jackson

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Michael Jackson

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Thriller


57
Procol Harum, 'Whiter Shade of Pale'
Writers: Keith Reid, Gary Brooker
Producer: Denny Cordell
Released: June '67, A&M
12 weeks; No. 5

A somber hymn supported by an organ theme straight out of Bach ("Air on the G String," from the "Suite No. 3 in D Major"), Procol Harum's "Whiter Shade of Pale" was unlike anything else on the radio in 1967. Reid got the idea for the song when he overheard someone at a party tell a woman, "You've gone a whiter shade of pale." The track was also the only one recorded by the initial lineup of Procol Harum, which started as a British band, the Paramounts, in 1963. A worldwide smash that sold more than 6 million copies and quickly found its way into wedding ceremonies (and, later, the Big Chill soundtrack), "Pale" helped kick-start the classical-rock boomlet that gave the world the Moody Blues.

Appears on: Greatest Hits (A&M)


56
The Sex Pistols, 'Anarchy in the U.K.'
Writers: Paul Cook, Steve Jones, Glen Matlock, Johnny Rotten
Producers: Chris Thomas, Bill Price
Released: Nov. '77, Warner Bros.
Non-single

This is what the beginning of a revolution sounds like: an explosion of punk-rock guitar noise and Johnny Rotten's evil cackle. The Sex Pistols set out to become a national scandal in the U.K., and they succeeded with their debut single. Jones made his guitar sound like a pub brawl, while Rotten snarled, spat and snickered, declaring himself an antichrist and ending the song by urging his fans, "Get pissed/Destroy!" EMI, the Sex Pistols' record label, pulled "Anarchy in the U.K." and dropped them, which just made them more notorious. "I don't understand it," Rotten said in 1977. "All we're trying to do is destroy everything."

Appears on: Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols (Warner Bros.) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Sex Pistols

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols


55
Little Richard, 'Long Tall Sally'
Writers: Robert "Bumps" Blackwell, Enotris Johnson, Little Richard
Producer: Blackwell
Released: March '56, Specialty
19 weeks; No. 6 

Half of a double-sided hit (the flip was "Slippin' and Slidin' [Peepin' and Hidin']"), "Long Tall Sally" was aimed squarely at pop singer Pat Boone. "The white radio stations wouldn't play Richard's version of 'Tutti-Frutti' and made Boone's cover Number One," recalled Blackwell. "So we decided to up the tempo on the follow-up and get the lyrics going so fast that Boone wouldn't be able to get his mouth together to do it!" "Long Tall Sally" proved to be Little Richard's biggest hit. Unfazed, Boone also recorded the song, taking it to Number Eight.

Appears on: The Georgia Peach (Specialty)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Little Richard

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Little Richard


54
The Kingsmen, 'Louie Louie'
Writer: Richard Berry
Producer: Ken Chase
Released: June '63, Jerden
16 weeks; No. 2 

A blast of raw guitars and half-intelligible shouting recorded for $52, the Kingsmen's cover of Richard Berry's R&B song hit Number Two in 1963 — thanks in part to supposedly pornographic lyrics that drew the attention of the FBI. The Portland, Oregon, group accidentally rendered the decidedly noncontroversial lyrics (about a sailor trying to get home to see his lady) indecipherable by crowding around a single microphone. "I was yelling at a mike far away," singer Jack Ely told Rolling Stone. "I always thought the controversy was record-company hype."

Appears on: The Best of the Kingsmen (Rhino) 


53
Percy Sledge, 'When a Man Loves a Woman'
Writers: Calvin Lewis, Andrew Wright
Producers: Marlin Greene, Quin Ivy
Released: March '66, Atlantic
13 weeks; No. 1 

Sledge was touring the South with an R&B combo called the Esquires when producer Ivy heard him belt out an intense, pleading ballad at the local Elks Club. Sledge had recently lost both his construction job and his girl, who'd taken off for L.A. to pursue a modeling career. "I didn't have any money to go after her, so there was nothing I could do to try and get her back," he later recalled. Ivy had the lyrics rewritten, and Sledge quit the Esquires to cut his first solo side, the immortal "When a Man Loves a Woman." When Atlantic's Jerry Wexler heard the song, he told partner Ahmet Ertegun, "Our billing for the summer is in the bag."

Appears on: It Tears Me Up: The Best of Percy Sledge (Rhino)


52
Prince, 'When Doves Cry'
Writer: Prince
Producer: Prince
Released: June '84, Warner Bros.
21 weeks; No. 1 

The Purple Rain soundtrack album was completed, and so was the movie. But Prince just couldn't stop making music. And at the very last minute, he added a brand-new song: "When Doves Cry." Even by Prince standards, it's eccentric; after single-handedly recording the stark, broken-hearted song in the studio, he decided to erase the bass track from the final mix. According to the engineer, Prince said, "Nobody would have the balls to do this. You just wait — they'll be freaking." He was right. Prince made it the soundtrack's first single — and 1984's most avant-garde pop record became his first American Number One hit, keeping Bruce Springsteen's "Dancing in the Dark" out of the top spot.

Appears on: Purple Rain (Warner Bros.) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Prince

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Prince

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Purple Rain


51
Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, 'The Message'
Writers: Duke Bootee, Melle Mel
Producer: Sylvia Robinson
Released: May '82, Sugar Hill
7 weeks; No. 62 

"The Message" was a breakthrough in hip-hop, taking the music from party anthems to street-level ghetto blues. It began as a poem by schoolteacher Bootee; Sugar Hill boss Robinson decided to make it a rap record with Melle Mel of the Furious Five. Said Flash in 1997, "I hated the fact that it was advertised as Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, because the only people on the record were Mel and Duke Bootee." But the song, driven by its signature future-shock synth riff and grim lyrics about urban decay, became an instant sensation on New York's hip-hop radio. "It played all day, every day," Flash said. "It put us on a whole new level."

Appears on: The Best of Sugar Hill Records (Rhino)

50
Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, 'The Tracks of My Tears'
Writers: Pete Moore, Robinson, Marv Tamplin
Producer: Robinson
Released: June '65, Tamla
12 weeks; No. 16 

Legend had it that audiences would actually break into tears when Robinson and the Miracles sang "The Tracks of My Tears." "It tapped into their emotions," said Moore of the Miracles. Pete Townshend was obsessed with the way Robinson put across the word "substitute" ("Although she may be cute/She's just a substitute"). So obsessed, he said, "that I decided to celebrate the word with a song all its own" — which is how he came to write the Who's 1966 hit "Substitute." When Robinson cut "Tears," it was such a clear winner that even hard-to-please Motown founder Berry Gordy proclaimed it a masterpiece.

Appears on: Going to a Go-Go (Motown)

100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Smokey Robinson

Smokey Robinson Photos


49
The Eagles, 'Hotel California'
Writers: Don Felder, Glenn Frey, Don Henley
Producer: Bill Szymczyk
Released: Dec. '76, Asylum
19 weeks; No. 1

"Hotel California" was rumored to be about heroin addiction or Satan worship, but Henley had more prosaic things on his mind: "We were all middle-class kids from the Midwest," he said. "'Hotel California' was our interpretation of the high life in Los Angeles." (That doesn't preclude heroin or Satan, of course.) Recording the six-and-a-half-minute song posed its share of problems: Working in Miami, the Eagles were initially unable to re-create Felder's 12-string intro and elaborate twin-guitar coda. Panicked, Felder called his housekeeper in L.A. and sent her digging through a pile of tapes in his home studio so she could play his demo back over the phone.

Appears on: Hotel California (Elektra) 

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Hotel California

• Eagles' Long Run: Photos from the Seventies and Beyond


48
Simon and Garfunkel, 'Bridge Over Troubled Water'
Writer: Paul Simon
Producers: Art Garfunkel, Roy Halee, Simon
Released: Feb. '70, Columbia
14 weeks; No. 1 

When Simon wrote this tribute to friendship, he and Garfunkel were arguing over everything, even who should sing it. "He felt I should have done it," Simon said. "Many times I'm sorry I didn't." The "Sail on, silver girl" verse was Garfunkel's idea; Simon has never liked it.

Appears on: Bridge Over Troubled Water (Columbia/Legacy) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Simon and Garfunkel

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Art Garfunkel

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Bridge Over Troubled Water


47
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, 'All Along the Watchtower'
Writer: Bob Dylan
Producer: Hendrix
Released: Sept. '68, Reprise
9 weeks; No. 20 

"All Along the Watchtower" had just been released on Dylan's John Wesley Harding when Hendrix began tinkering with the song at Electric Lady Studios in New York on January 21st, 1968. Using the line "And the wind began to howl" as a springboard, Hendrix constructed a tumultuous four-part solo that transformed Dylan's concise foreboding into an electric hurricane. Dylan acknowledged Hendrix's masterstroke: His subsequent versions of "All Along the Watchtower," including the treatment on his 1974 reunion tour with the Band and the live LP Before the Flood, emulated Hendrix's cover.

Appears on: Electric Ladyland (MCA) 

100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix

100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix

500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Electric Ladyland


46
David Bowie, 'Heroes'
Writers: Bowie, Brian Eno
Producer: Tony Visconti
Released: Sept. '77, RCA
Did not chart

After a coke-fried spell in Los Angeles, Bowie was detoxing in Berlin when he spied two lovers having a rendezvous by the Berlin Wall. Said Bowie, "I thought, of all the places to meet in Berlin, why pick a bench underneath a guard turret on the Wall?" Imagining the story behind their affair, Bowie wrote his most compassionate song ever. The song builds for six minutes, with Bowie setting his ragged, impassioned croon over a throbbing groove consisting of Eno's humming synths, Robert Fripp's guitar and producer Visconti banging on a metal ashtray that was lying around the studio. Bowie wails with crazed soul about two doomed lovers finding a moment of redemption together — just for one day.

Appears on: Heroes (Virgin) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: David Bowie

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: David Bowie


45
Elvis Presley, 'Heartbreak Hotel'
Writers: Mae Boren Axton, Tommy Durden, Presley
Producer: Steve Sholes
Released: Jan. '56, RCA
27 weeks; No. 1 

When RCA Records signed "hillbilly cat" Presley, they expected more songs like his rockabilly hits from Sun Records. Instead, for his first RCA single, Presley recorded this gloomy, downtempo number, co-written by Axton, his former publicist, and inspired by a Miami Herald report of a suicide note that consisted solely of the line "I walk a lonely street." But what Sun Records founder Sam Phillips called "a morbid mess" went on to become Presley's first Number One hit and million-selling single, thanks to Scotty Moore's steely guitar leads, a thumping bass line from Bill Black and the brilliant melodrama with which Elvis infused every line.

Appears on: Elvis 30 #1 Hits (RCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley


44
Ray Charles, 'Georgia on My Mind'
Writers: Hoagy Carmichael, Stuart Gorrell
Producer: Sid Feller
Released: Sept. '60, ABC-Paramount
13 weeks; No. 1 

Charles' driver had heard him singing "Georgia on My Mind" in the car and suggested that Charles add that to the record he was working on, an album consisting of songs with place names in their titles. Once he recorded it, though, Charles said he thought of many ways his rendition could have been better. As the single was about to enter the charts, Charles introduced his version to America on Hugh Hefner's Playboy Penthouse, a syndicated show out of Chicago, with David "Fathead" Newman handling the string parts on flute.

Appears on: Ultimate Hits Collection (Rhino) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Ray Charles

 


43
Little Richard, 'Tutti-Frutti'
Writers: Dorothy La Bostrie, Richard Penniman, Joe Lubin
Producer: Robert "Bumps" Blackwell
Released: Dec. '55, Specialty
12 weeks; No. 17

"I'd been singing 'Tutti-Frutti' for years," said Richard, "but it never struck me as a song you'd record." Blackwell asked La Bostrie, a young songwriter who had been pestering him for work, to clean up the filthy original lyrics ("Tutti Frutti, good booty/If it don't fit, don't force it/You can grease it, make it easy"). "Fifteen minutes before the session was to end, the chick comes in and puts these little trite lyrics in front of me," said Blackwell. Richard cleaned up his own "Awop-bop-a-loo-mop a-good-goddamn" and loaded La Bostrie's doggerel with sexual dynamite.

Appears on: The Georgia Peach (Specialty)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Little Richard

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Little Richard


42
The Kinks, 'Waterloo Sunset'
Writer: Ray Davies
Producer: Ray Davies
Released: Feb. '68, Reprise
Did not chart

The Davies brothers were in the middle of recording their band's fifth album, Something Else by the Kinks, when Ray played an early version of this delicate orchestral-pop ballad for Dave. "We started ad-libbing vocal parts around the chorus," Dave said. Ray recalled that he went home and revised "until [the song] became like a pebble which had been rounded off by the sea . . . perfectly smooth." But he initially held off sharing the lyrics — about a loner who "don't need no friends" — with the rest of the band. "I was embarrassed by how personal [the lyrics] were," he later wrote. "It was like an extract from a diary nobody was allowed to read."

Appears on: Something Else by the Kinks (Warner Bros.)


41
The Band, 'The Weight'
Writer: Robbie Robertson
Producer: John Simon
Released: Aug. '68, Capitol
7 weeks; No. 63

The Band was chiefly known as Bob Dylan's touring group when it retreated to a pink house in Woodstock, New York, to record its debut, Music From Big Pink. The album was centered by "The Weight," an oddball fable of debt and burden driven by an indelible singalong chorus ("Take a load off, Fanny. . . ."). Robertson said he was inspired to write the song after watching director Luis Bunuel's films about "the impossibility of sainthood," but characters such as Crazy Chester (who tries to pawn his dog off on the narrator) could have walked straight out of an old folk song. As for the biblical-sounding line "pulled into Nazareth," it refers to Nazareth, Pennsylvania, home of the Martin Guitar factory.

Appears on: Music From Big Pink (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Music From Big Pink


40
Martha Reeves and the Vandellas, 'Dancing in the Street'
Writers: Marvin Gaye, Ivy Hunter, William "Mickey" Stevenson
Producer: Stevenson Released: Sept. '64
14 weeks; No. 2

Gordy Stevenson, who gave Martha Reeves her first job, as his secretary, approached the group with this song after it was turned down by Motown labelmate (and future Mrs. Stevenson) Kim Weston. The trio agreed to record "Dancing in the Street" as a demo with its songwriters singing background. "When Martha got into the song," Stevenson said, "that was the end of the conversation!" Against a backbeat that cracks like a gunshot, Reeves reinvents the world as a giant block party.

Appears on: The Ultimate Collection (Motown)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Martha and the Vandellas


39
Buddy Holly and the Crickets, 'That'll Be the Day'
Writers: Jerry Allison, Holly, Norman Petty
Producer: Petty
Released: May '57, Brunswick
1 week; No. 1

Recorded in Clovis, New Mexico, in February 1957, the song took its title from a recurring line in the John Wayne movie The Searchers. "We were cutting 'That'll Be the Day' just as a demo to send to New York, just to see if they liked the sound of the group — not for a master record," recalled Crickets drummer Allison. "So we just went in and set up and sort of shucked through the song." Allison credits Holly's guitar-picking on "That'll Be the Day" to the influence of New Orleans bluesman Lonnie Johnson.

Appears on: Greatest Hits (MCA) 

100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Buddy Holly

100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Buddy Holly


38
The Rolling Stones, 'Gimme Shelter'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: April '69, London
11 weeks; No. 21 

The Stones channeled the emotional wreckage of the late Sixties on a song that Richards wrote in 20 minutes. The intro, strummed on an electric-acoustic guitar modeled on a Chuck Berry favorite, conjures an unparalleled aura of dread. Singer Merry Clayton brings down Armageddon with a soul-wracked wail: "Rape, murder, it's just a shot away." The song surfaced days after Meredith Hunter's murder at Altamont. "That's a kind of end-of-the-world song, really," Jagger said in 1995. "It's apocalypse." Richards later said that his guitar fell apart on the last take, "as if by design."

Appears on: Let It Bleed (ABKCO) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mick Jagger

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Keith Richards

• The Rolling Stones Live, 1964-2007


37
Bob Marley, 'No Woman, No Cry'
Writers: Vincent Ford, Marley
Producers: Chris Blackwell, Marley and the Wailers
Released: May '75, Island
Did not chart

The uptempo version on 1975's Natty Dread is forgettable, but the swaying, incantatory take on 1975's Live! remains one of the reggae legend's most beloved performances. The "government yard in Trench Town" refers to the Jamaican public-housing project where Marley lived in the Fifties. He gave a songwriting credit to childhood friend Vincent "Tata" Ford to help keep Ford's Kingston soup kitchen running.

Appears on: Natty Dread (Island)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Marley

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Marley

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Natty Dread

• Photos: Intimate Moments with Bob Marley During the Golden Age of Reggae


36
U2, 'One'
Writers: Bono, the Edge, Adam Clayton, Larry Mullen Jr.
Producers: Brian Eno, Daniel Lanois
Released: Nov. '91, Island
20 weeks; No. 10 

Achtung Baby was the album on which U2 traded in a decade of earnestness for irony, but the new approach resulted in their most moving single ever. "One" was spun off from another song, "Mysterious Ways," when the Edge came up with two ideas for the bridge, and Bono so liked one of them that he wrote a new set of lyrics. Though some hear it as a love song, the words are full of hurt and ambiguity. "People have told me they play it at their wedding," the Edge said. "And I think, 'Have you listened to the lyrics? It's not that kind of a song.'"

Appears on: Achtung Baby (Island) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: U2

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bono

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Achtung Baby


35
The Doors, 'Light My Fire'
Writers: Robby Krieger, John Densmore, Jim Morrison, Ray Manzarek
Producer: Paul Rothchild
Released: June '67, Elektra
17 weeks; No. 1 

It was the first song Krieger ever wrote — with additional lyrics from Morrison and arrangements from the rest of the band. "It's like I'd saved up all [these ideas] in my mind and got them out all at once," Krieger said. The song catapulted the Doors to overnight fame, which Krieger says was part of Morrison's plan: "Jim had this idea of the band being a shooting star," Krieger said. "Fire" ran for seven minutes on the LP and was cut down to three, with Krieger's and keyboardist Manzarek's solos excised, on the single.

Appears on: The Doors (Elektra)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Jim Morrison


34
The Righteous Brothers, 'You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin''
 Writers: Phil Spector, Barry Mann, Cynthia Weil
Producer: Spector
Released: Dec. '64, Philles
16 weeks; No. 1 

Spector was conducting the musicians for a Ronettes show in San Francisco when he decided to sign the Righteous Brothers, who were on the bill. He then asked Mann and Weil to come up with a hit for them. Bill Medley's intro sounds impossibly deep. "When Phil played it for me," Mann recalled, "I said, 'Phil, you have it on the wrong speed!'" Bobby Hatfield was puzzled by his partner's opening solo: "What do I do while he's singing the entire first verse?" he asked Spector, who answered, "You can go directly to the bank."

Appears on: Anthology 1962-1974 (Rhino)

The Righteous Brothers Photos


33
Ike and Tina Turner, 'River Deep - Mountain High'
Writers: Phil Spector, Jeff Barry, Ellie Greenwich
Producer: Spector
Released: May '66, Philles
4 weeks; No. 88 

Spector heard the Ike and Tina Turner Revue at a Hollywood club at a time when their recording career had stalled after a handful of R&B hits in the early 1960s. Spector had a song called "River Deep — Mountain High" that he was sure was going to be huge, and he wanted Tina to sing it, though he forbade Ike from even coming to the sessions. "I must have sung that 500,000 times," Tina later said. "I was drenched with sweat. I had to take my shirt off and stand there in my bra to sing."

Appears on: Proud Mary: The Best of Ike and Tina Turner (EMI)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Tina Turner

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Tina Turner


32
The Rolling Stones, 'Sympathy for the Devil'
Writers: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Jimmy Miller
Released: Dec. '68, London
Non-single

The inspiration for this hellish detour came from Soviet writer Mikhail Bulgakov's novel The Master and Margarita, which depicts Satan having his way in 1930s Moscow. Richards struggled to find the right backing for Jagger's menacing Dylan-esque lyrics, unsure "whether it should be a samba or a goddamn folk song," he recalled. The Stones ended up giving the devil one of their best grooves, built on Rocky Dijon's congas and Bill Wyman's Bo Diddley-ish maracas. "Before, when we were just innocent kids out for a good time [the media said], 'They're evil, they're evil,'" Richards said. "So that makes you start thinking about evil. . . . Everybody's Lucifer."

Appears on: Beggar's Banquet (ABKCO) 

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Beggar's Banquet

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mick Jagger

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Keith Richards

• Photos: The Rolling Stones Live, 1964-2007


31
Led Zeppelin, 'Stairway to Heaven'
Writers: Jimmy Page, Robert Plant
Producer: Page
Released: Nov. '71, Atlantic
Non-single

All epic anthems must measure themselves against "Stairway to Heaven," the cornerstone of Led Zeppelin IV. The acoustic intro sounds positively Elizabethan, thanks to John Paul Jones' recorder solo and Plant's fanciful lyrics, which were partly inspired by Lewis Spence's historical tome Magic Arts in Celtic Britain. Over eight minutes, the song morphs into a furious Page solo that storms heaven's gate. Page said the song "crystallized the essence of the band. It had everything there and showed us at our best. It was a milestone. Every musician wants to do something of lasting quality, something which will hold up for a long time. We did it with 'Stairway.'"

Appears on: Led Zeppelin IV (Atlantic) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Led Zeppelin

• 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Led Zeppelin IV

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimmy Page

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Robert Plant

• Classic Led Zeppelin: Onstage and Behind the Scenes 1969-1985


30
Johnny Cash, 'I Walk the Line'
Writer: Cash
Producer: Sam Phillips
Released: Aug. '56, Sun
22 weeks; No. 17 

Cash began work on this track while he was in Germany with the Air Force, years before he would ever enter a studio. He returned to it after he hit with "Folsom Prison Blues," only to find that the original tape had gotten mangled. But Cash liked the strange sound and added a click-clack rhythm by winding a piece of wax paper through his guitar strings. Phillips then had him speed up the song, originally a ballad, to a driving rumble. "It was different than anything else you had ever heard," Bob Dylan told Rolling Stone. "A voice from the middle of the Earth."

Appears on: The Complete Original Sun Singles (Varese Sarabande)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Johnny Cash

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Johnny Cash

• Photos: Intimate, All-Access Shots of Johnny Cash


29
The Beatles, 'Help!'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: July '65, Capitol
13 weeks; No. 1 

"Most people think it's just a fast rock & roll song," Lennon said. "Subconsciously, I was crying out for help. I didn't realize it at the time; I just wrote the song because I was commissioned to write it for the movie." Overwhelmed by Beatlemania, Lennon was eating "like a pig," drinking too much and "smoking marijuana for breakfast" — only 24 years old, he was already expressing nostalgia for his lost youth. "I don't like the recording that much," Lennon would later tell Rolling Stone. "We did it too fast, to try and be commercial."

Appears on: Help! (Capitol) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles


28
The Beatles, 'A Day in the Life'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: June '67, Capitol
Non-single 

"A Day in the Life" was one of the last true Lennon-McCartney collaborations: Lennon wrote the opening and closing sections, and McCartney contributed the "Woke up/Fell out of bed" middle. For the climax, they hired 40 musicians, dressed them in tuxedos and funny hats, and told them they had 15 bars to ascend from the lowest note on their instruments to the highest. "Listen to those trumpets — they're freaking out," McCartney said. The final piano chord concluded Sgt. Pepper and made rock's possibilities seem infinite.

Appears on: Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (Capitol)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band


27
Derek and the Dominos, 'Layla'
Writers: Eric Clapton, Jim Gordon
Producers: Tom Dowd, the Dominos
Released: Nov. '70, Atco
15 weeks; No. 10 

Embroiled in a love triangle with George and Patti Boyd Harrison, Clapton took the title for his greatest song from the Persian love story "Layla and Majnoun." Recorded by the short-lived ensemble Derek and the Dominos, "Layla" storms with aching vocals and crosscutting riffs from Clapton and contributing guitarist Duane Allman, then dissolves into a serene, piano-based coda. "It was the heaviest thing going on at the time," Clapton told Rolling Stone in 1974. "That's what I wanted to write about most of all."

Appears on: Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs (Polydor)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Eric Clapton

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Eric Clapton

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs


26
Otis Redding, '(Sittin' on) the Dock of the Bay'
Writers: Redding, Steve Cropper
Producer: Cropper
Released: Jan. '68, Volt
16 weeks; No. 1

A few days after his starmaking set at the Monterey Pop Festival in June 1967, Redding stayed on a houseboat in Sausalito, California, while he played the Fillmore in San Francisco. He wrote the first verse to "Dock of the Bay" on that boat, then completed the song with guitarist Cropper in Memphis. Just a few days later, Redding was on tour with the Bar-Kays when his private plane crashed into Lake Monona in Madison, Wisconsin. While divers searched for Redding's body, Cropper kept his mind busy by mixing "Dock of the Bay." On December 11th, 1967, the plane was pulled out of the lake, with Redding's body still strapped into the co-pilot's seat.

Appears on: The Dock of the Bay (Atlantic) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Otis Redding

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Otis Redding

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Dock of the Bay


25
The Beach Boys, 'God Only Knows'
Writers: Brian Wilson, Tony Asher
Producer: Wilson
Released: May '66, Capitol
8 weeks; No. 39 

"It's very emotional, always a bit of a choker with me," said Paul McCartney of this Pet Sounds ballad. The night McCartney and John Lennon first heard Pet Sounds, at a London party, they wrote "Here, There and Everywhere," which is influenced by "God Only Knows." Carl Wilson's understated lead vocal is note-perfect, but it's the arrangement of horns, sleigh bells, strings and accordion that gives "God" its heavenly feel. Brian Wilson was fascinated by spirituality and said this song came out of prayer sessions in the studio. "We made it a religious ceremony," he said of recording Pet Sounds. The only problem: The use of the word "God" in the title scared off some radio programmers.

Appears on: Pet Sounds (Capitol) 

RELATED:

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Pet Sounds


24
The Impressions, 'People Get Ready'
Writer: Curtis Mayfield
Producer: Johnny Pate
Released: Jan. '65, ABC-Paramount
8 weeks; No. 14 

"It was warrior music," said civil rights activist Gordon Sellers. "It was music you listened to while you were preparing to go into battle." Mayfield wrote the gospel-driven R&B ballad, he said, "in a deep mood, a spiritual state of mind," just before Martin Luther King Jr.'s march on the Impressions' hometown of Chicago. Shortly after "People Get Ready" was released, churches in Chicago began including their own version of it in songbooks. Mayfield's version of the song ended with "You don't need no ticket/You just thank the Lord," but the churches' rendition, ironically, made the lyrics less Christian and more universal: "Everybody wants freedom/This I know."

Appears on: The Very Best of the Impressions (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Curtis Mayfield

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Curtis Mayfield


23
The Beatles, 'In My Life'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Dec. '65, Capitol
Non-single 

"''In My Life' was, I think, my first real, major piece of work," John Lennon said. "Up until then it had all been glib and throwaway." The ballad reflects the serious turn the Beatles took with Rubber Soul, but it specifically arose from a journalist's challenge: Why don't you write songs about your life? The original lyrics put Lennon on a bus in Liverpool, "and it was the most boring sort of 'What I Did on My Holidays Bus Trip' song," he said. So Lennon rewrote the lyrics, changing the song into a gorgeous reminiscence about his life before the Beatles. The distinctive "harpsichord" solo near the song's end is actually an electric piano played by Martin and sped up on tape.

Appears on: Rubber Soul (Capitol) 

RELATED:

•The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles


22
The Ronettes, 'Be My Baby'
Writers: Jeff Barry, Ellie Greenwich, Phil Spector
Producer: Spector
Released: Aug. '63 
13 weeks; No. 2 

Phil Spector rehearsed this song with Ronnie Bennett (the only Ronette to sing on it) for weeks, but that didn't stop him from doing 42 takes before he was satisfied. Aided by a full orchestra (as well as a young Cher, who sang backup vocals), Spector created a lush, echo-laden sound that was the Rosetta stone for studio pioneers such as the Beatles and Brian Wilson, who calls this his favorite song. "The things Phil was doing were crazy and exhausting," said Larry Levine, Spector's engineer. "But that's not the sign of a nut. That's genius."

Appears on: The Best of the Ronettes (ABKCO)


21
Bruce Springsteen, 'Born to Run'
Writer: Springsteen
Producers: Springsteen, Mike Appel
Released: Aug. '75, Columbia
11 weeks; No. 23

This song's four and a half minutes took three and a half months to cut. Aiming for the impact of Phil Spector's Wall of Sound, Springsteen included strings, glockenspiel, multiple keyboards — and more than a dozen guitar tracks. "I had enormous ambitions for it," said Springsteen. "I wanted to make the greatest rock record I'd ever heard." Springsteen's lyrics told a story of young lovers on the highways of New Jersey. "I don't know how important the settings are," Springsteen said. "It's the idea behind the settings. It could be New Jersey, it could be California, it could be Alaska."

Appears on: Born to Run (Columbia)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bruce Springsteen

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bruce Springsteen

• Bruce Springsteen: The Vintage Photographs

• Bruce Springsteen: The Rolling Stone Covers


20
The Beatles, 'Let It Be'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: March '70, Apple
14 weeks; No. 1

Inspired by the church-born soul of Aretha Franklin, an anxious Paul McCartney started writing "Let It Be" in 1968, during the contentious sessions for the White Album. His opening lines — "When I find myself in times of trouble/Mother Mary comes to me" — were based on a dream in which his own late mother, Mary, offered solace during a tumultuous time for both the band and the culture, assuring him that everything would turn out fine. "I'm not sure if she used the words 'Let it be,'" McCartney recalled, "but that was the gist of her advice." McCartney unveiled a skeletal version of "Let It Be" to the other Beatles at an even worse time: during the initial, disastrous Let It Be rehearsals in January 1969. John Lennon, the group's resident heretic, was brutally dismissive, mistaking McCartney's secular humanism for self-righteous piety. Yet the Beatles put special labor into the song, getting the consummate take on January 31st — the day after their last live performance, on the roof of their Apple offices in London. (R&B musician Billy Preston, a friend of the band's from its early days, contributed the gospel-flavored organ part.) George Harrison later took a couple of cracks at adding a guitar solo: The single version features his solo from April 30th, 1969, and the album cut's solo was taped at the final Beatles recording session, on January 4th, 1970. Released four months later, "Let It Be" effectively became an elegy for the band that had defined the Sixties.

Appears on: Let It Be (Capitol/Apple)

RELATED:
• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles

• The Top Ten Beatles Songs of All Time


19
Elvis Presley, 'Hound Dog'
Writers: Jerry Leiber, Mike Stoller
Producer: Steve Sholes
Released: July '56, RCA
28 weeks; No. 1

"Hound Dog" was a hit before Elvis Presley sang it, and he was famous for singing it before he recorded it. Written in 1952 by white teenagers Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller for R&B singer Willie Mae "Big Mama" Thornton, it was a smash for her, and was immediately covered by a handful of country acts. (The chorus, Leiber noted in 1987, was code for "You ain't nothin' but a motherfucker.") Presley, always on the lookout for hillbilly/R&B crossover possibilities, added the song to his stage act in the spring of 1956, after hearing Freddie Bell and the Bellboys sing it in Las Vegas. On June 5th of that year, his hip-swiveling performance of "Hound Dog" on The Milton Berle Show became an instant sensation — notorious enough that on his next TV appearance, he crooned the song to a top-hatted basset hound. The next morning, Presley and his band got deadly serious about "Hound Dog," perfecting it over 31 takes at New York's RCA Studios. With snarling vocal authority, D.J. Fontana's tommy-gun drumrolls and slashing guitar by Scotty Moore, Presley transformed the song's blues changes and put-down rhymes into a declaration of independence from his generation's cold, rigid elders. "Hound Dog" was the flip side of "Don't Be Cruel," Presley's third RCA single. It was also the song in which he told the world: Like it or not, rock & roll is here to stay.

Appears on: Elvis 30 #1 Hits (RCA) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Elvis Presley

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Elvis Presley

• Young Elvis Presley: A Look Back at the King at 21 on His 75th Birthday


18
Chuck Berry, 'Maybellene'
Writer: Berry
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess
Released: July '55, Chess
11 weeks; No. 5

Rock & roll guitar starts here. The pileup of hillbilly country, urban blues and hot jazz in Chuck Berry's electric twang is the primal language of pop- music guitar, and it's all perfected on his first single. The entire song is a two-minute chase scene packed with car-culture vernacular and Berry's hipster-lingo inventions ("As I was motorvatin' over the hill. . . ."). Its groove comes from "Ida Red," a 1938 recording by Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys (of a song that dates back to the 19th century). By the time of the May 21st, 1955, session, Berry had been playing country tunes for black audiences for a few years — "After they laughed at me a few times, they began requesting the hillbilly stuff," he has said. Leonard Chess came up with the title, inspired by a Maybelline mascara box lying on the floor at the Chess studio. DJ Alan Freed had nothing to do with writing "Maybellene," although he got co-credit and royalties for years in return for radio airplay: payola in all but name.

Appears on: The Anthology (Chess) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Chuck Berry

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Chuck Berry

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Chuck Berry


17
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, 'Purple Haze'
Writer: Hendrix
Producer: Chas Chandler
Released: March '67, Reprise
8 weeks; No. 65

It is one of the unforgettable opening riffs in rock: a ferocious, stomping guitar march, scarred with fuzz and built around the dissonant "devil's interval" of the tritone. And it launched not one but two revolutions: late-Sixties psychedelia and the unprecedented genius of Jimi Hendrix. For the first time, Hendrix, bassist Noel Redding and drummer Mitch Mitchell got to show off their acrobatic onstage chemistry on record — and they somehow managed to condense it to an under-three-minute blaze of overdubbed guitar sorcery. (The first chord of its main riff has come to be known among guitarists as the "Hendrix chord.") The song, which Hendrix wrote on December 26th, 1966, in the dressing room of a London club, also served as a showcase for his brilliant, often contradictory lyrical gifts (boiled down from a much longer initial draft called "Purple Haze — Jesus Saves"). He spiked the surging rhythmic confidence of the Experience with intimate pictorial tension: "Actin' funny, but I don't know why/'Scuse me while I kiss the sky." (Hendrix later said that he had written the lyrics after he'd had a dream in which he could walk underwater.) The Experience recorded "Purple Haze" across a series of sessions in January and February, 1967, experimenting with recording techniques such as the blitzed-out distortion on Hendrix's guitar — when the master tape was sent to their American record label, an enclosed note diligently pointed out that the distorted sound of the song was deliberate. In the closing solo, Hendrix echoed his screaming Strat with an additional shrieking guitar put through a new harmonic-manipulation device called an Octavia and played back at double speed. "Purple Haze" — the opening track on the U.S. version of his debut LP, Are You Experienced? — captured the liberating rush of Day-Glo culture just in time for the Summer of Love.

Appears on: Are You Experienced? (Experience Hendrix) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Jimi Hendrix

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Are You Experienced?


16
The Beatles, 'I Want to Hold Your Hand'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Dec. '63, Capitol
15 weeks; no. 1

As a young, struggling beat group, playing grueling gigs at grubby bars, the Beatles had an in-joke to cheer themselves up: declaring that they were going "to the toppermost of the poppermost." By 1963, they meant it enough to issue an ultimatum. "We said to [manager] Brian Epstein, 'We're not going to America till we've got a Number One record,'" Paul McCartney said. So he and John Lennon went to the home of the parents of Jane Asher, McCartney's girlfriend, where — "one on one, eyeball to eyeball," as Lennon put it — they wrote "I Want to Hold Your Hand," an irresistibly erotic come-on framed as a chaste, bashful request. The lightning-bolt energy of their collaboration ran through the band's performance, taped October 17th, 1963. It lunges out of the speakers with a rhythm so tricky that the first wave of bands to cover the song often couldn't figure it out; Lennon and McCartney constantly switch between unison and harmonies, both of them snapping and whooping like they own the melody. Every element of the song is a hook, from Lennon's Chuck Berry riffing to George Harrison's string-snapping guitar fills to the quartet's syncopated hand claps. With advance orders at a million copies, "I Want to Hold Your Hand" was released in the U.K. in late November, and promptly bumped the band's own "She Loves You" from the top of the charts.

After 15-year-old Marsha Albert convinced a Washington, D.C., DJ to seek out an imported copy of the single, it quickly became a hit on the few American stations that managed to score a copy. Rush-released in America the day after Christmas, "I Want to Hold Your Hand" hit Number One in the States on February 1st, 1964. When the bandmates got the news in Paris, during a three-week stand there, they partied all night. The single was certified gold two days later, and four days after that, the Beatles landed in New York the way they'd wanted: toppermost of the poppermost.

Appears on: Meet the Beatles! (Capitol/Apple) 

RELATED:

• 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles


15
The Clash, 'London Calling'
Writers: Mick Jones, Joe Strummer
Producer: Guy Stevens
Released: Jan. '80, Epic
Did not chart

Named after the call signal of the BBC's World Service broadcasts, the title alarm of the Clash's third album was an SOS from the heart of darkness. When they recorded the song, the Clash — British punk's most political and uncompromising band — were without management and sinking in debt. Around them, Britain was suffocating in crisis: soaring unemployment, racial conflict, widespread drug use. "We felt that we were struggling," Joe Strummer said, "about to slip down a slope or something, grasping with our fingernails. And there was no one there to help us."

Strummer and guitarist Mick Jones channeled that trial and worry into a song, produced with hellbent atmosphere by Guy Stevens, that sounded like the Clash marching into battle: Strummer and Jones punching their guitars in metallic unison with Paul Simonon's thumping bass and Topper Headon's rifle-crack drumming. Over that urgency, Strummer howled through a catalog of disasters, real and imagined. The "nuclear error" referred to the March 1979 meltdown of a reactor at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania. The line "London is drowning/And I live by the river" — Don Letts' video of the Clash shows them playing the song on a boat on the Thames in drenching rain — was based on local folklore. "They say that if the Thames ever flooded, we'd all be underwater," Jones said — except Strummer was living in a high-rise flat at the time, "so he wouldn't have drowned."

Appears on: London Calling (Epic) 

RELATED:

• DeNiro, Cannibals and Punk Rock: Mick Jones Narrates the True Adventures of the Clash


14
Bob Dylan, 'Blowin' in the Wind'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: John Hammond
Released: May '63, Columbia
Did not chart

In April 1962, at Gerde's Folk City in New York's Greenwich Village, 20-year-old Bob Dylan gave a quick speech before playing one of his new songs: "This here ain't no protest song or anything like that, 'cause I don't write no protest songs," he said. Then he sang the first and third verses of the still-unfinished "Blowin' in the Wind." Published in full a month later in the folk journal Broadside and recorded on July 9th, 1962, for his second album, The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan, "Blowin' in the Wind" was Dylan's first important composition. It is also the most famous protest song ever written.

The Chad Mitchell Trio were the first to release a recording of it, and Peter, Paul and Mary turned it into an enormous hit in the summer of 1963. Still, everyone knew the song belonged to the burning-eyed young man who ruled New York's folk scene, and whose recording of it — just his brambly voice and fleet-fingered acoustic-guitar playing — was definitive. It probably remains Dylan's most covered song, an all-purpose progressive anthem suggesting that things must and will change. The song's melody borrows from the slavery-era folk song "No More Auction Block for Me," and its language is rooted as much in Woody Guthrie's earthy vernacular as in biblical rhetoric. But in a decisive break with the current-events conventions of topical folk songs, Dylan framed the crises around him in a series of fierce, poetic questions that addressed what he believed was man's greatest inhumanity to man: indifference. "Some of the biggest criminals are those that turn their heads away when they see wrong," he declared in the Freewheelin' liner notes.

Later, Dylan revealed more about the mechanics of writing the song: "I wrote 'Blowin' in the Wind' in 10 minutes, just put words to an old spiritual, probably something I learned from Carter Family records. That's the folk tradition. You use what's been handed down."

Appears on: The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan (Columbia) 

RELATED:

Bob Dylan at 70

• 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Bob Dylan

• 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Bob Dylan


13
The Beatles, 'Yesterday'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Sept. '65, Capitol
11 weeks; No. 1

Paul McCartney's greatest ballad holds a Guinness World Record as the most recorded song of all time; seven years later, there were 1,186 versions by artists as varied as Frank Sinatra, Otis Redding and Willie Nelson. But McCartney's original reading — cut on June 14th, 1965, at EMI's Abbey Road studios in London — remains the most beautiful and daring of all: a frank poem of regret scored and sung with haunted elegance. There are no other Beatles on the record. None were needed. George Martin's arrangement for a string quartet emphasized lower-octave melancholy, while McCartney's almost whispered vocal reverberated with longing in the big, dark spaces where drums and electric guitars would have been. The melody, he said, came to him in a dream: "My dad used to know a lot of old jazz tunes, I thought maybe I'd just remembered it from the past." McCartney auditioned the song for Martin, with the working title "Scrambled Eggs," in a hotel room in Paris in January 1964 — before the Beatles had even landed in America — but would not record it for another year and a half. "We were a little embarrassed about it," McCartney confessed. "We were a rock & roll band." A Number One single in America, "Yesterday" was, in his own words, "the most complete song I have ever written."

Appears on: Help! (Capitol/Apple)

RELATED:

• The Lost Beatles Photos: Rare Shots From 1964-1966




12
Sam Cooke, 'A Change Is Gonna Come'
Writer: Cooke
Producers: Hugo Peretti, Luigi Creatore
Released: Dec. '64, RCA
7 weeks; No. 31

In 1963, Sam Cooke — America's first great soul singer and one of the most successful pop acts in the nation, with 18 Top 30 hits since 1957 — heard a song that profoundly inspired and disturbed him: Bob Dylan's "Blowin' in the Wind." What struck Cooke was the challenge implicit in Dylan's anthem. "Jeez," Cooke mused, "a white boy writing a song like that?"

Cooke's response, "A Change Is Gonna Come," recorded on January 30th, 1964, with a sumptuous orchestral arrangement by Rene Hall, was more personal — in its first-person language and the experiences that preceded its creation. On October 8th, 1963, while on tour, Cooke and members of his entourage were arrested in Shreveport, Louisiana, for disturbing the peace after they tried to register at a white motel — an incident reflected in the song's third verse. And Cooke's mourning for his 18-month-old son, Vincent, who drowned that June, resonates in the last verse: "There have been times that I thought/I couldn't last for long."

On December 11th, 1964, a year after he recorded it, Cooke was fatally shot at an L.A. motel. Two weeks later, "A Change Is Gonna Come" was released, becoming Cooke's farewell address and an anthem of the civil rights movement.

Appears on: Portrait of a Legend 1951-1964 (ABKCO) 

RELATED:

• 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Sam Cooke

• 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Sam Cooke


11
The Who, 'My Generation'
Writer: Pete Townshend
Producer: Shel Talmy
Released: Nov. '65, Decca
5 weeks; No. 74

The Who's guitarist, Pete Townshend, supposedly wrote "My Generation," his immortal fuck-off to the elders in his way, on his 20th birthday, May 19th, 1965, while riding a train from London to Southampton for a television appearance. The song wasn't intended as a youth-mutiny anthem at first. It was a Jimmy Reed-style blues, reflecting Townshend's fears about the impending strictures of adult life, famously captured in the line "Hope I die before I get old." "My Generation' was very much about trying to find a place in society," he told Rolling Stone in 1987. "I was very, very lost. The band was young then. It was believed that its career would be incredibly brief." Instead, "My Generation" became the Who's ticket to legend — their first British Top Five hit, and a battle cry for young mod rebels — and it established Townshend as a fearless and eloquent songwriter. "My Generation" went through months of arranging and rerecording before the Who got it right, in two takes, on October 13th, 1965. Townshend opened the song with a two-chord assault that beat punk rock to the punch by more than a decade. Bassist John Entwistle took the solo breaks with crisp, grunting aggression — he had to buy three new basses to finish the recording, since his Danelectro's strings kept breaking and replacement strings weren't available. (He ended up playing the song on a Fender.) Roger Daltrey's stuttering, howling performance, Townshend and Entwistle's R&B-inspired backing vocals, and the upward key changes created a vivid, mounting anxiety that climaxed with a studio re-creation of the Who's live gear-trashing finales, with Townshend spewing feedback all over Keith Moon's avalanche drumming. Four decades later, Townshend and Daltrey are all that remain of the original Who, and they still play "My Generation" at every show — now with the fire and wisdom of age.

Appears on: My Generation (Universal) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Pete Townshend


10
Ray Charles, 'What'd I Say'
Writer: Charles
Producers: Ahmet Ertegun, Jerry Wexler
Released: June '59, Atlantic
15 weeks; No. 6

"The people just went crazy, and they loved that little ummmmh, unnnnh," Ray Charles told Rolling Stone in 1978, describing the instant genesis of "What'd I Say," his first Top 10 pop single and the greatest feel-good song in rock & roll. "Later on, people said it was vulgar," Charles continued, referring to that irresistible, sexually heated vocal bridge. "But, hell, let's face it, everybody knows about the ummmmh, unnnnh. That's how we all got here."

The man they called "The Genius" literally wrote "What'd I Say" in front of an audience, in late 1958 or early '59. He and his crack R&B orchestra, newly supplemented by a female vocal group, the Raelettes, were playing a marathon dance show in a small town near Pittsburgh. When Charles ran out of repertoire late in the second set, he kicked into an uphill bass-note arpeggio on the piano, told the band to follow along and instructed the Raelettes, "Whatever I say, just repeat after me." Afterward, Charles said, dancers rushed up to him and asked, "Where can I buy that record?"

"What'd I Say" may not have been much of a song — a handful of short, unconnected verses, the chorus and that bridge — when Charles cut it on February 18th, 1959, at Atlantic's New York studio. (The six-and-a-half-minute rave-up was masterfully edited and re-sequenced by the label's visionary engineer, Tom Dowd, from an even longer studio performance.) But out of necessity, that night on the bandstand Charles had turned to the black gospel experience he knew so well, the shared, mounting ecstasy of call-and-response. "Church was simple," he said in his autobiography Brother Ray. "Preacher sang or recited, and the congregation sang right back at him."

That is exactly how Charles recorded "What'd I Say," with a torrid secular spin heightened by the metallic attack of his Wurlitzer electric piano. Charles' grunt-'n'-groan exchanges with the Raelettes were the closest you could get to the sound of orgasm on Top 40 radio during the Eisenhower era. Forty-five years later, they still give sweet release.

Appears on: The Ultimate Hits Collection (Rhino)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Ray Charles


9
Nirvana, 'Smells Like Teen Spirit'
*

Writer: Kurt Cobain
Producer: Butch Vig
Released: Sept. '91, DGC
20 weeks; No. 6

Producer Butch Vig first heard "Smells Like Teen Spirit" in early 1991, on a boombox cassette recorded by bassist Krist Novoselic, drummer Dave Grohl and singer-guitarist-songwriter Kurt Cobain in a barn in Tacoma, Washington. The fidelity was abysmal. Vig — about to work with Nirvana on their major-label debut, Nevermind — could not tell that the song would soon make underground Seattle rock the new mainstream and catapult Cobain, a troubled young man with strict indie-culture ethics, into megacelebrity. "I could sort of hear the 'Hello, hello' part and the chords," Vig said years later. "But it was so indecipherable that I had no idea what to expect."

Nor did anyone else. A shock wave of big-amp purity, "Teen Spirit" wiped the lingering jive of the Eighties off the pop map overnight. "The song was a call to consciousness," Novoselic said in 2000 — Cobain's avenging grenade against the corporate invasion of youth culture, spiked with the demanding venom of the sneering chorus: "Here we are now/Entertain us." The phrase was something Cobain used to say at parties — "to break the ice," he said. "That could have been him watching TV," said Novoselic, "aghast at popular culture."

"Teen Spirit," named after a brand of deodorant for girls, was Cobain's attempt to "write the ultimate pop song," he said, using the soft-loud dynamic of his favorite band, the Pixies. The insidious hooks also showed his admiration for John Lennon. Cobain "had that dichotomy of punk rage and alienation," Vig said, "but also this vulnerable pop sensibility. In 'Teen Spirit,' a lot of that vulnerability is in the tone of his voice."

Sadly, by the time of Nirvana's last U.S. tour, in late '93, Cobain was tortured by the obligation to play "Teen Spirit" every night. "There are many other songs that I have written that are as good, if not better," he claimed. He finally stopped playing "Teen Spirit" for good — taking his own life on April 5th, 1994.

Appears on: Nevermind (DGC) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Nirvana

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Nirvana's Nevermind


8
The Beatles, 'Hey Jude'
Writers: John Lennon, Paul McCartney
Producer: George Martin
Released: Aug. '68, Apple
19 weeks; No. 1

The Beatles' biggest U.S. single — nine weeks at Number One — was also their longest, at seven minutes and 11 seconds. During the recording sessions, producer George Martin objected to the length, claiming DJs would not play the song. "They will if it's us," John Lennon shot back. Paul McCartney wrote "Hey Jude" in June 1968, singing to himself on his way to visit Lennon's soon-to-be-ex-wife, Cynthia, and their son, Julian. The opening lines were, McCartney once said, "a hopeful message for Julian: 'Come on, man, your parents got divorced. I know you're not happy, but you'll be OK.'" McCartney changed "Jules" to "Jude" — a name inspired by Jud from the musical Oklahoma! — and presented a demo tape to Lennon, who loved the song. He also thought McCartney was singing to him, about his relationship with Yoko Ono and the strains on the Lennon-McCartney partnership. But his self-centered reading underscored the universal comfort in McCartney's lyrics and the song's warm, rolling charm, fortified in the fade-out by a 36-piece orchestra whose members (with one grumpy exception) also clapped and sang along — for double their usual fee.

Appears on: 1 (Capitol/Apple) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beatles

• The Top Ten Beatles Songs of All Time


7
Chuck Berry, 'Johnny B. Goode'
Writer: Chuck Berry
Producers: Leonard and Phil Chess
Released: April '58, Chess
15 weeks; No. 8

"Johnny B. Goode" was the first rock & roll hit about rock & roll stardom. It is still the greatest rock & roll song about the democracy of fame in pop music. And "Johnny B. Goode" is based in fact. The title character is Chuck Berry — "more or less," as he told Rolling Stone in 1972. "The original words [were], of course, 'That little colored boy could play.' I changed it to 'country boy' — or else it wouldn't get on the radio." Berry took other narrative liberties. Johnny came from "deep down in Louisiana, close to New Orleans," rather than Berry's St. Louis. And Johnny "never ever learned to read or write so well," while Berry graduated from beauty school with a degree in hairdressing and cosmetology.

But the essence of Berry's tale — a guitar player with nothing to his name but chops goes to the big city and gets his name in lights — is autobiographical. In 1955, Berry was working as a beautician in St. Louis when he met Chess Records' biggest star, Muddy Waters, who sent him to the label's co-founder Leonard Chess. By 1958, Berry was rock & roll's most consistent hitmaker after Elvis Presley. Unlike Presley, Berry wrote his own classics. "I just wish I could express my feelings the way Chuck Berry does,"' Presley once confessed.

"Johnny B. Goode" is the supreme example of Berry's poetry in motion. The rhythm section rolls with freight-train momentum, while Berry's stabbing, single-note lick in the chorus sounds, as he put it, "like a-ringin' a bell" — a perfect description of how rock & roll guitar can make you feel on top of the world.

Appears on: The Anthology (Chess)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Chuck Berry

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Chuck Berry

• The 100 Greatest Guitartists of All Time: Chuck Berry


6
The Beach Boys, 'Good Vibrations'
Writers: Brian Wilson, Mike Love
Producer: Wilson
Released: Oct. '66, Capitol
14 weeks; No. 1

"It scared me, the word 'vi-brations,'" Brian Wilson once said, remembering how, when he was a boy, his mother, Audree, tried to explain why dogs barked at some people and not others. "A dog would pick up vibrations from these people that you can't see but you can feel. And the same thing happened with people." "Good Vibrations" harnessed that energy and turned it into eternal sunshine. "This is a very spiritual song," Wilson said after its release, "and I want it to give off good vibrations."

Wilson, then 24, also had another goal in mind: "I said, 'This is going to be better than "You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'.'"

Wilson was still working on his long-playing magnum opus, Pet Sounds, when he started "Good Vibrations" late on the night of February 17th, 1966, at Gold Star Recorders in Los Angeles. During the next seven months, in four studios, at a cost of more than $50,000 (at that point the greatest sum ever spent on a single), Wilson built "Good Vibrations" in sections, coloring the mood swings with locomotive cello, saloon piano and the spectral wail of a theremin. "We didn't think about doing it in pieces at first," Wilson says now, "but after the first few bars in the first verse, we realized that this was going to be a different kind of record." Very different. Wilson — free to experiment while the other Beach Boys were on tour — could not stop wrestling with combinations of instruments and rhythmic approaches. One discarded version of the song had an R&B backbeat.

"Good Vibrations" became the Beach Boys' third Number One hit, but it was a short window of glory — for the Beach Boys commercially, for Wilson creatively and emotionally. The song was intended to appear on the group's Smile album, but Wilson — suffering from depression and battling the other Beach Boys over the group's direction — abandoned Smile in May 1967, eventually completing the record, and performing it on tour, in 2004. "'Good Vibrations' now is the best it's ever been," Wilson said that year. "It went to Number One in 1966, and now we get standing ovations every time we play it live. It's incredible to me."

Appears on: Smiley Smile/Wild Honey (Capitol) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Beach Boys

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Brian Wilson


5
Aretha Franklin, 'Respect'
Writer: Otis Redding
Producer: Jerry Wexler
Released: April '67, Atlantic
12 weeks; No. 1

Otis Redding wrote "Respect" and recorded it first, for the Volt label in 1965. But Aretha Franklin took possession of the song for all time with her definitive cover, made at Atlantic's New York studio on Valentine's Day 1967. "Respect" was her first Number One hit and the single that established her as the Queen of Soul. In Redding's reading, a brawny march, he called for equal favor with volcanic force. Franklin wasn't asking for anything. She sang from higher ground: a woman calling an end to the exhaustion and sacrifice of a raw deal with scorching sexual authority. In short, if you want some, you will earn it.

"For Otis, respect had the traditional connotation, the more abstract meaning of esteem," Franklin's producer, Jerry Wexler, said in his autobiography, Rhythm and the Blues: A Life in American Music. "The fervor in Aretha's voice demanded that respect; and more respect also involved sexual attention of the highest order. What else would 'Sock it to me' mean?"

He was referring to the knockout sound of Franklin's backup singers — her sisters Carolyn and Erma — chanting "Sock it to me" at high speed, which Aretha and Carolyn cooked up for the session. The late Tom Dowd, who engineered the date, credited Carolyn with the saucy breakdown in which Aretha spelled out the title: "I fell off my chair when I heard that!" And since Redding's version had no bridge, Wexler had the band — the legendary studio crew from Muscle Shoals, Alabama — play the chord changes from Sam and Dave's "When Something Is Wrong With My Baby" under King Curtis' tenor-sax solo.

There is no mistaking the passion inside the discipline of Franklin's delivery; she was surely drawing on her own tumultuous marriage at the time for inspiration. "If she didn't live it," Wexler said, "she couldn't give it." But, he added, "Aretha would never play the part of the scorned woman….Her middle name was Respect."

Appears on: I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You (Atlantic)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Aretha Franklin

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Aretha Franklin


4
Marvin Gaye, 'What's Going On'
Writers: Gaye, Renaldo Benson, Al Cleveland
Producer: Gaye 
Released: Feb. '71, Tamla
13 weeks; No. 2

"What's Going On" is an exquisite plea for peace on Earth, sung by a man at the height of crisis. In 1970, Marvin Gaye was Motown's top male vocal star, yet he was frustrated by the assembly-line role he played on his own hits. Devastated by the loss of duet partner Tammi Terrell, who died that March after a three-year battle with a brain tumor, Gaye was also trapped in a turbulent marriage to Anna Gordy, Motown boss Berry Gordy's sister. Gaye was tormented, too, by his relationship with his puritanical father, Marvin Sr. "If I was arguing for peace," Gaye told biographer David Ritz, "I knew I'd have to find peace in my heart."

Not long after Terrell's passing, Renaldo Benson of the Four Tops presented Gaye with a song he had written with Motown staffer Al Cleveland. But Gaye made the song his own, overseeing the arrangement and investing the topical references to war and racial strife with private anguish. Motown session crew the Funk Brothers cut the stunning, jazz-inflected rhythm track (Gaye joined in with cardboard-box percussion). Then Gaye invoked his own family in moving prayer: singing to his younger brother Frankie, a Vietnam veteran ("Brother, brother, brother/There's far too many of you dying"), and appealing for calm closer to home ("Father, father, father/We don't need to escalate").

Initially rejected as uncommercial, "What's Going On" (with background vocals by two players from the Detroit Lions) was Gaye's finest studio achievement, a timeless gift of healing. But for Gaye, the peace he craved never came: On April 1st, 1984, he died in a family dispute — shot by his father.

Appears on: What's Going On (Tamla)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Marvin Gaye

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: Marvin Gaye


3
John Lennon, 'Imagine'
Writer: John Lennon
Producers: Lennon, Phil Spector, Yoko Ono
Released: Oct. '71, Apple
9 weeks; No. 3

John Lennon wrote "Imagine," his greatest musical gift to the world, one morning early in 1971 in his bedroom at Tittenhurst Park, his estate in Ascot, England. His wife, Yoko Ono, watched as Lennon sat at the white grand piano now known around the world from films and photographs of the sessions for his Imagine album and virtually completed the song: the serene melody; the pillowy chord progression; that beckoning, four-note figure; and nearly all of the lyrics, 22 lines of graceful, plain-spoken faith in the power of a world, united in purpose, to repair and change itself.

"It's not like he thought, 'Oh, this can be an anthem,'" Ono said, looking back at that morning 30 years later. "Imagine" was "just what John believed: that we are all one country, one world, one people. He wanted to get that idea out."

The idea was not his alone: Ono's own art, before and after she met Lennon in 1966, celebrated the transformative power of dreams. The first line of "Imagine" — "Imagine there's no heaven" — is a direct descendant of the interactive pieces in Ono's 1964 book, Grapefruit ("Imagine letting a goldfish swim across the sky"). But Lennon, as a former Beatle, was an expert in the pop vernacular. He once admitted that "Imagine" — an absolute equality created by the dissolution of governments, borders, organized religion and economic class — was "virtually the Communist Manifesto." But the elementary beauty of his melody, the warm composure in his voice and the poetic touch of co-producer Phil Spector — who bathed Lennon's performance in gentle strings and summer-breeze echo — emphasized the song's fundamental humanity.

Lennon knew he had written something special. In one of his last interviews, he declared "Imagine" to be as good as anything he had written with the Beatles. We know it's better than that: an enduring hymn of solace and promise that has carried us through extreme grief, from the shock of Lennon's own death in 1980 to the unspeakable horror of September 11th. It is now impossible to imagine a world without "Imagine." And we need it, more than he ever dreamed.

Appears on: Imagine (Capitol/Apple) 

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: John Lennon

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: John Lennon

• The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time: Imagine

• Photos: The World Remembers John Lennon

• Photos: John Lennon and Yoko Ono in New York


2
The Rolling Stones, '(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction'
Writer: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards
Producer: Andrew Loog Oldham
Released: May '65, London
14 weeks; No. 1 

 "It's the riff heard round the world," says Steve Van Zandt, guitarist for the E Street Band. "And it's one of the earliest examples of Dylan influencing the Stones and the Beatles — the degree of cynicism, and the idea of bringing more personal lyrics from the folk and blues tradition into popular music."

The riff came to Keith Richards in a dream one night in May 1965, in his motel room in Clearwater, Florida, on the Rolling Stones' third U.S. tour. He woke up and grabbed a guitar and a cassette machine. Richards played the run of notes once, then fell back to sleep. "On the tape," he said later, "you can hear me drop the pick, and the rest is snoring."

That spark in the night — the riff that opens and defines "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction" — transformed the rickety jump and puppy love of early rock & roll into rock. The primal temper of Richards' creation, played through a Gibson Fuzz Box; the sneering dismissal in Mick Jagger's lyrics; the strut of rhythm guitarist Brian Jones, bassist Bill Wyman and drummer Charlie Watts: It was the sound of a generation impatient to inherit the Earth.

Two decades later, Jagger admitted that "Satisfaction" was "my view of the world, my frustration with everything." Inspired by that riff and the title line, also Richards' idea, Jagger wrote the words — a litany of disgust with "America, its advertising syndrome, the constant barrage" — in 10 minutes, by the motel pool the day after Richards' dream. They tried to cut the song a few days later, on May 10th at the Chess studios in Chicago. Two days after that, they finished it at RCA Studios in Hollywood, with the vital addition of that fuzz. "That riff needed to sustain itself," Richards said, "and Gibson had just brought out these little boxes."

"Satisfaction" was rock of the Stones' own bold design — although Richards may also have been dreaming of Chuck Berry that night in Clearwater. Jagger later suggested that Richards unconsciously got the hook for "Satisfaction" from a line in Berry's 1955 single "30 Days"â€ˆ("I don't get no satisfaction from the judge"). "It's not any way an English person would express it," Jagger noted. "I'm not saying that he purposely nicked anything, but we played those records a lot."

Appears on: Out of Our Heads (ABKCO)

RELATED:

• The 100 Greatest Artists of All Time: The Rolling Stones

• The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time: Mick Jagger

• The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: Keith Richards

• Photos: The Rolling Stones Live, 1964-2007


1
Bob Dylan, 'Like a Rolling Stone'
Writer: Dylan
Producer: Tom Wilson 
Released: July '65, Columbia
12 weeks; No. 2

"I wrote it. I didn't fail. It was straight," Bob Dylan said of his greatest song shortly after he recorded it in June 1965. There is no better description of "Like a Rolling Stone" — of its revolutionary design and execution — or of the young man, just turned 24, who created it.

Al Kooper, who played organ on the session, remembers today, "There was no sheet music, it was totally by ear. And it was totally disorganized, totally punk. It just happened."

The most stunning thing about "Like a Rolling Stone" is how unprecedented it was: the impressionist voltage of Dylan's language, the intensely personal accusation in his voice ("Ho-o-o-ow does it fe-e-e-el?"), the apocalyptic charge of Kooper's garage-gospel organ and Mike Bloomfield's stiletto-sharp spirals of Telecaster guitar, the defiant six-minute length of the June 16th master take. No other pop song has so thoroughly challenged and transformed the commercial laws and artistic conventions of its time, for all time.

Just a few weeks earlier, as he was finishing up the British tour immortalized in D.A. Pennebaker's documentary Don't Look Back, Dylan began writing an extended piece of verse — 20 pages long by one account, six in another — that was, he said, "just a rhythm thing on paper all about my steady hatred, directed at some point that was honest." Back home in Woodstock, New York, over three days in early June, Dylan sharpened the sprawl down to that confrontational chorus and four taut verses bursting with piercing metaphor and concise truth. "The first two lines, which rhymed 'kiddin' you' and 'didn't you,' just about knocked me out," he confessed to Rolling Stone in 1988, "and when I got to the jugglers and the chrome horse and the princess on the steeple, it all just about got to be too much."

The beginnings of "Like a Rolling Stone" can be seen in a pair of offstage moments in Don't Look Back. In the first, sidekick Bob Neuwirth gets Dylan to sing a verse of Hank Williams' "Lost Highway," which begins, "I'm a rolling stone, I'm alone and lost/For a life of sin I've paid the cost." Later, Dylan sits at a piano, playing a set of chords that would become the melodic basis for "Like a Rolling Stone," connecting it to the fundamental architecture of rock & roll. Dylan later identified that progression as a chip off of Ritchie Valens' "La Bamba."

Yet Dylan obsessed over the forward march in "Like a Rolling Stone." Before going into Columbia Records' New York studios to cut it, he summoned Bloomfield, the guitarist in the Paul Butterfield Blues Band, to Woodstock to learn the song. "He said, 'I don't want you to play any of that B.B. King shit, none of that fucking blues,' " recalled Bloomfield (who died in 1981). " 'I want you to play something else.' " Dylan later said much the same thing to the rest of the studio band, which included pianist Paul Griffin, bassist Russ Savakus and drummer Bobby Gregg: "I told them how to play on it, and if they didn't want to play it like that, well, they couldn't play with me."

Just as Dylan bent folk music's roots and forms to his own will, he transformed popular song with the content and ambition of "Like a Rolling Stone." And in his electrifying vocal performance, his best on record, Dylan proved that everything he did was, first and always, rock & roll. " 'Rolling Stone' 's the best song I wrote," he said flatly at the end of 1965. It still is.

Appears on: Highway 61 Revisited (Columbia)